the decision of the appeal turns upon the question whether the testator 's intention was to give to his widow ail ordinary life estate or an estate analogous to that of a hindu widow. the court 's primary duty in such cases is to ascertain from the language employed by the testator what were his intentions keeping in view the surrounding circumstances his ordinary notions as a hindu in respect to devolution of his property his family relationships etc. considering the will in the light of these principles it seems that lakshminarayan iyer intended by his will to direct that his entire properties should be enjoyed by his widow during her lifetime but her interest in these properties should come to an end on her death that all these properties in their entirety should thereafter be enjoyed as absolute owners by his daughter and her heirs with powers of alienation gift exchange and sale from generation to generation. he wished to make his daughter a fresh stock of descent so that her issue male or female may have the benefit of his property. they were the real persons whom he earmarked with certainty as the ultimate recipients of his bounty. if not the testator would clearly have said that the daughter would only take the properties remaining after the death of the widow. the widow can not be held to have been given a full hindu widow 's estate under the will unless power of alienation in express terms was not conferred on her. the properties disposed of by the will and mentioned in the schedule were considerable in extent and it seems that they fetched sufficient income to enable the widow to fulfil the obligations under the will. she represents the estate in all respects and enjoys very wide power except that she can not alienate except for necessity and her necessities have to be judged on a variety of considerations. though the daughter was not entitled to immediate possession of the property it was indicated with certainty that she should get the entire estate at the proper time and she thus got an interest in it on the testator 's death. in ram bahadur vs jager nath prasad 3 pat l j 199 will was construed as conveying an absolute estate to the son and the daughter of the niece it was remarked that in spite of an express restriction against alienation the estate taken by section the niece was an estate such as a woman ordinarily acquires by inheritance under the hindu law which she holds in a completely representative character but is unable to alienate except in case of legal necessity and that such a construction was in accordance with the ordinary notions that a hindu has in regard to devolution of his property. in pavani subbamma vs ammala rama naidu 1937 1 m l j 268 1936 ind law mad 236 the question for decision in that case was whether widow was at all entitled to sell anything more than her life interest even for purposes of meeting a necessity binding upon the estate varadachari j held that since in the will the gift over to the grand children was of the entire properties and not a mere gift by way of defeasance it had to be held that it indicated that the prior gift in favour of the widow was only of a limited interest. in vasantharao ammannamma vs venkata kodanda rao pantalu 1939 indlaw mad 621 1940 m l j 188 the next case cited a hindu testator who was a retired subordinate judge provided by his will as follows out of the aforestated ancestral lands the oneninth share to which i am entitled shall be enjoyed after my death by my wife till her death and after her death it shall pass to section son of my second elder brother deceased his self acquired properties shall on my death be enjoyed by my wife till her death and after her death they shall pass to my daughter thereafter they shall pass to my grandson through my daughter. generally speaking there will be no point in making a will if what is to be given to a widow is what she would get on intestacy and cases do arise where a hindu wishes to give to his widow a more restricted estate than she would get on intestacy or a much larger estate than that. what is given must be gathered from the language of the will in the light of the surrounding circumstances. the language used in the will was consistent with the testator 's intention of conferring a life estate in the english sense as well as with the intention of conferring a hindu widow 's estate. 