the primary meaning of the word bonus imports the conception of a boon a gift or a gratuity otherwise described as an ex gratia payment. the word bonus has however acquired a secondary meaning in the sphere of industrial relations it is classified amongst the methods of wage payment. in sutton vs attorney general 1923 39 t l r 294 297 where the term bonus may of course be properly used to describe payments made of grace and not as of right. but it nevertheless may also include as here payments made because legally due but which the parties contemplate will not continue indefinitely. there are however two conditions which have to be satisfied before a demand for bonus can be justified and they are 1 when wages fall short of the living standard and 2 the industry makes huge profits part of which are due to the contribution which the workmen make in increasing production. the demand for bonus becomes an industrial claim when either or both these conditions are satisfied. the surplus that remained after meeting the aforesaid deductions would be available for distribution as bonus. the claim for bonus can be made by the employees only if as a result of the joint contribution of capital and labour the industrial concern has earned profits. if in any particular year the working of the industrial concern has resulted in loss there is no basis nor justification for a demand for bonus. the dividends can only be paid out of profits and unless and until profits are made no occasion or question can also arise for distribution of any sum as bonus amongst the employees. this was also the basis of the demand of the respondent in the case before us its case being that the appellant had reaped substantial profits during 1949. on the accounts of each year being made up and the profits of the industrial concern being ascertained the workers during the particular year have their demand for bonus fully satisfied out of the surplus profits and the balance of profits is allocated and carried over in the accounts. no further claimed payment of bonus out of those reserves or undistributed profits can therefore survive. it is also significant to note that even while importing considerations of social justice the labour appellate tribunal was oblivious of the fact that it was by their own acts of indiscipline and strike that the workers of the appellant company themselves contributed to the trading losses incurred by the appellant and it hardly lay in their mouth then to contend that they were none the less entitled to a payment of bonus commensurate with the dividend paid to the shareholders out of the undistributed profits of the previous years. the labour appellate tribunal also overlooked the fact that but for the public companies limitation of dividend ordinance of 1948 the whole of the profits of 1948 could have been distributed after paying the workers bonus in that year of four annas in the rupee. in textile mills m p their workmen 1952 2 l l j 625 and famous cine laboratory vs their workmen 1953 1 l l j 466 and in the latter case it deprecated the idea of adjudicators importing considerations of social justice which were not comprised in that formula and what is social justice social justice is not the fancy of any individual adjudicator if it were so then ideas of social justice might vary from adjudicator to adjudicator over all parts of india in our full bench decision see 1950 2 l l j 1247 we carefully considered the question of social justice in relation to bonus and there we equated the rights and liabilities of employers and workmen with a view to achieving a just formula for the computation of bonus that full bench decision stands and this tribunal and all other tribunals are bound by it. 