though it is desirable that the facts should be referred to in the sanction itself nonetheless if they do not appear on the face of it the prosecution must establish aliunde by evidence that those facts were placed before the sanctioning authorities. it is therefore necessary to first examine the order of sanction to ascertain on what facts it has been accorded. it is apparent that the facts which the central govt considered for the purposes of according sanction were a that the appellant as a public servant was entrusted with crops situated on the land acquired for the extension of air field sirsa b that by abusing his position as a public servant he allowed the standing crops to be cut from the said land c that by corrupt or illegal means and by abusing his position as a public servant he obtained pecuniary advantage of rs 2500 as the value of the crops to be cut from the land andor he dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriated that sum by converting it into his own use instead of depositing the said sale price in the govt treasury. it would be seen therefore that under section 51c a public servant will be said to commit the offence of misconduct in hi duties if he dishonestly allows any other persons to convert to his own use property which is entrusted to the said public servant. the facts which have been set out in the order granting the sanction certainly are sufficient to indicate that the authorities granting the sanction had the offence under section 51c also in their contemplation. no work had in fact been undertaken on the land acquired and also that possession of the existing runway and track had already been given. nothing is specifically mentioned about possession of the acquired land being given to him on that date re no basis for sanction for a charge under section 51 c. a person could not be charged merely with the breach of a particular provision of the order he must be charged with the commission of certain acts which constitute a breach and it is to that prosecution that is for having done acts which constitution breach of the order that the sanction is required. in the present case there is nothing on the face of the sanction and no extraneous evidence to show that the sanctioning authority knew the facts alleged to constitute a breach of the order and the sanction is invalid. the case of jaswant singh vs the state of puniab 1957 indlaw sc 59 was also cited by the respondent 's advocate in support of the contention that the trial of two offences requiring sanction was not valid. with reference to each one of the persons who it was claimed should have been called that there was already evidence relating to the particular matter about which the person specified was sought to be called. for instance it is said that gamkhar military estate officer was not produced to prove the receipt ex p 24 but this was not necessary because gamkhar was not present nor did he sign the receipt. 