the compensation officer is charged with fixing the quantum in the prescribed manner. a compensation assessment roll containing the gross asset and net income of each estate together with the compensation payable in respect of such estate has to be prepared by him. the dynamic rule of law with a social mission makes a meaningful distinction between rights steeped in the old system and compensation for deprivation of those interests on the one hand and the ordinary commercial transactions or regulation of rights untinged by social transformation urges on the other. this gives rationality to the seeming disparity. moreover the high court has rightly pointed out that the validity of section 373 of the act which fixes a small rate of interest on the compensation amount has been upheld by the supreme court in gajapati narayan 's case. article 313 read with article 312 bars any challenge to the amount of compensation on acquisition by the state subject to compliance with the prescriptions in the said sub articles on the ground that the amount so fixed or determined is not adequate. presidential assent has been accorded to this state act and so the ban operates. moreover article 31a repels the applicability of articles 14 19 and 31 to the acquisition by the state of any estate or of any rights therein etc. in the case of forests it is the assumed income and not the actual income that forms the basis of calculation of compensation. on the other hand statutory compensation is provided for on the formula of assumed income in the previous year. similarly an assumed income tax also has to be worked out and deducted. the statutory scheme of compensation for forest lands consists of machinery for assessment of the net income which is multiplied on a sliding scale and the method of challenge to the determination by the aggrieved owner of state. so the first step is for the government to appoint forest officers from out of d f os in the forest department for the purposes of the act. those officers ascertain the income from the forest concerned and the figure so fixed is subject to the approval of the c c f chief conservator of forests. the power to approve implies the power to disapprove or modify but not to report or arrive at an income de hors the forest officer 's report altogether. indeed there was a fundamental difference in the basis adopted by the forest officer and the chief conservator in the matter of assessing the income of the forests in question. it is astonishing that anyone should urge as the appellant did that the date of vesting is the last date by which the calculation of compensation should have been made and since that had not been done the compensation officer had become functus officio in awarding compensation. in this context it is perhaps not irrelevant to remember that the appellant a freedom fighter is an 83 year old man and at this stage of his life the state should show ommiseration not merely in quickly disposing of the proceedings but also in not being cantankerous in awarding and disbursing the balance compensation. 