it must be remembered that although the wage scales were introduced as long ago as 1973 they were maintained at that level except for a slight revision some time thereafter. no dearness allowance was paid until the beginning of 1977 and the house rent allowance also was introduced about that time. the cost of living had gone on increasing from 1972 onwards and as the tribunal has found the dearness allowance and house rent allowance made no appreciable impact in neutralising the increasing cost. during all these years the appellant had continued to enjoy increasing profits nonetheless the emoluments received by the workmen did not receive the impress of the appellant 's growing prosperity. the charter of demands was presented by the union in july1974 and when conciliation proceedings failed the state government made the reference to the industrial tribunal in 1975. the tribunal has referred to various considerations which prevailed with it in giving retrospectivity to the revised pay scales. they are considerations which can not be ignored. accordingly the contention raised on behalf of the appellant against retrospectivity of the wage scales must be rejected. the financial capacity of the appellant and the related study of its annual profits from 1968 to 1977were examined from that view point. the sufficiency of the existing pay scales was considered in detail and regard was had to their original structure and the accretions made subsequently by way of dearness allowance and house rent allowance. for the purpose of restructuring the pay scales the tribunal ruled on the paying capacity of the appellant both with reference to the profits of the preceding year as well as the prospects of the future. the financial capacity as the tribunal observed constituted one of the principles which are required to be followed in the fixation of the wage structure. no ad hoc increase to the pay of each individual workman was intended. the jurisdiction given to the tribunal by rule 31 is closely circumscribed. it is only a clerical mistake or error which can be corrected and the clerical mistake or error must arise from an accidental slip or omission in the award. an accidental slip or omission implies that something was intended and contrary to that intention what should not have been included has been included or what should have been included has been omitted. it must be a mistake or error amenable to clerical correction only. it must not be a mistake or error which calls for rectification by modification of the conscious adjudication on the issues involved. the omission of the words to each employee first after the figure rs 150 and again after the figure rs 100 was clearly an accidental slip or omission which the tribunal was entitled to correct. it will be noted that the pay scales of different categories were being restructured and the flat increase envisaged there related to an increase in the general pay scales of different categories. individual workmen were not present to the mind of the tribunal. that the increase was pertinent to the general pay scales in the revised wage structure is patently clear from a comparison of the existing pay scales and the revised pay scales. the comparative table of existing pay scales and the revised pay scales has been reproduced earlier. the revised pay scales of all categories except the category of draughtsmen shows an increase of rs 100 in the initial pay fixed in each scale the increase in the case of the category of draughtsmen being. rs 150. there was only one increase contemplated in the award in paragraph 23 of award and it is more than plain that the increase was the one incorporated in the revised pay scales pertaining to different categories. no second flat increase was envisaged at all. the amendment made by the tribunal has the effect of providing a second increase this time to each individual workmen. if as the tribunal has stated in the amendment order the increase in paragraph 23 was intended to apply to each individual workmen there is nothing in the body of the award to form the foundation on which the actual figures in the restructured pay scales can be made to rest. there will be no explanation why the initial start of the revised pay scales has been increased by rs 150 in the case of the category of draughtsmen and rs 100 in the case of other categories. considering the fitment of the workman in the revised scales it was stated in the award that a workman found drawing a salary less than the beginning of the grade would be stepped up to the beginning of the grade and if his pay fell between two steps in the reclassified pay scales the basic pay was to be fixed at the step higher in the revised scale. reliance was placed on the hindustan times ltd new delhi v their workmen 1964 1 scr 234 1962 indlaw sc 436247 where it was observed by this court that dearness allowance should not remain fixed at any figure but should be on a sliding scale in order to neutralise a portion of the increase in the cost of living. reference was also made to bengal chemical amp pharmaceutical works limited v its workmen 1969 2 scr 113 1968 indlaw sc 183. now it is not a universal rule that the dearness allowance should in all cases be correlated with the cost of living index. it was open to the tribunal to adopt the position which it did. if the dearness allowance is linked with the cost of living index the whole award will have to be reopened and the entire basis on which it has been made will have to be reconsidered. the award is a composite document in which the several elements of increased wage scales larger increments longer span of 20 years for earning increments dearness allowance at 10 of the basic wage besides several other benefits have been integrated into a balanced arrangement in keeping with what the tribunal has found to be the financial capacity of the appellant. it is not possible to maintain one part of the award and supersede another. conspicuous by its absence is any reference to a flat increase in the pay of an individual workmen. we are not impressed with the submission that the corrigendum was in effect a fresh award. we therefore see no ground for quashing the of the tribunal. dearness allowance linked to cost of living index is ordinarily the best and the most scientific method of computing dearness allowance it can not always be said that an illegality warranting interference under article 136 is committed if some other method is adopted. the tribunal has given satisfactory reason for adopting a different mode and we are not disposed to interfere with the award of the tribunal. 