no document was filed to show that abdul khader was declared by the revenue courts as a protected tenant. there being no such finding by the revenue officer on the other hand there being a finding mat abdul khader was not a protected tenant by the revenue authorities it was not open to the arbitrator to decide the question of protected tenancy. the arbitrator therefore exceeded his jurisdiction and the high court was in error under s 99 of the andhra pradesh act the bar was not against the arbitrator but against a civil court. in determining the amount of compensation payable to abdul khader under the central act his interests in the property had to be determined. in another context the high court of andhra pradesh enunciated the position that it was necessary to determine the interest of the persons claiming compensation. reference may be made to the decision in the case of archi appalareddi and another v special tahsildar land acquisition visakhapatnam municipality and mother where the court observed in the context of the land acquisition act that a tenant was a person interested as defined in clause b of s 3 of the land acquisition act. he has a right to object to the acquisition andor the quantum of compensation. the land acquisition officer or the court as the case may be had to ascertain the value of a claimant 's right in the property acquired and compensate him in that behalf. by the scheme of the central act compensation was payable to persons who had interest in the land acquired. who are the persons who have interest in the land had to be decided in accordance with the law and the evidence. determination by the revenue authorities and non determination is not conclusive or decisive. it is clear that s 102 of the andhra pradesh act mentions that after acquisition the act was not to apply in respect of certain land. therefore it was submitted by the respondents that s 99 of the andhra pradesh act which made the determination by the tahsildar to be final and debarred other courts from going into the question did not apply in case of compensation payable. in the background of the totality of circumstances as manifest in the different orders it appeared to the arbitrator and the court that the entry which was made in favour of abdul khader as the protected tenant was of doubtful validity. we may mention that in the two orders of this court dated 30th of january1975 and 19th of august1985 referred to herein before this court had left it open to the high court and to the arbitrator to decide whether he is a protected tenant or not. the arbitrator has decided that question and the high court found over whelming evidence in support of it. in that view of the matter we must uphold that decision however unsatisfactory it might appear that a fruit pucker gets 60 of the compensation while the owners get only if that is the law let it be. 