the partnership deed exhibit 114 was executed by six persons and at that stage the appellant or his father were not partners in the firm. but thereafter when the partnership deed exhibit 69 was executed the appellant and his father joined the firm with an agreement to share profits only and their share was fixed at 0 03 paise in a rupee. there is a third partnership deed exhibit 70 which showed that the deceased tenant girdharlal had died on 1st of february1961 and so by the remaining seven partners with same terms and conditions a new partnership deed being exhibit 70 was executed on 22nd september1961 at this time the share of the appellant was fixed at 0 03 paise in a rupee to share the profits only. it is well settled that if there was such a partnership firm of which the appellant was a partner as a tenant the same would not amount to subletting leading to the forfeiture of the tenancy. section 4 of the indian partnership act1932it says partnership is the relation between persons who have agreed to share the profits of a business carried on by all or any of them acting for all. the terms and conditions in the partnership deed are as under. 1 the entire work of our partnership has to be carried out in the name of bharat neon signs. 2 the work to be carried out by our partnership is of manufacturing and selling neon signs tubes and of obtaining orders therefore. 3 whatever moneys that may be required to be invested in our partnership are to be invested by the parties of the first second third fourth and seventh parts out of us and the interest at the rate of 712 per cent per annum has to be paid for the moneys that may be invested in this partnership. the court was of the opinion that these were evidence that these terms were acted upon. a right to appeal carries with it right of re heating on law as well as fact unless the statute conferring the right to appeal limits the re hearing in some way. the power to hear a revision is generally given to a superior court so that it may satisfy itself that a particular case is decided according to law. the jurisdiction of high court is to correct all errors of law going to the root of the decision which would in such cases include even perverse findings of facts perverse in the sense that no reasonable person acting judicially and properly instructed in the relevant law could arrive at such a finding on the evidence on the record in this view in our opinion the ambit of the power was expressed in rather wide amplitude. the high court must ensure that the principles of law have been correctly borne in mind. secondly the facts have been properly appreciated and a decision arrived at taking all material and relevant facts in mind it must be such a decision which no reasonable man could have arrived at. lastly such a decision does not lead to a miscarriage of justice. if a possible view has been taken the high court would be exceeding its jurisdiction to substitute its own view with that the courts below because it considers it to be a better view. the fact that the high court would have taken a different view is wholly irrelevant. the authority vested in the high court under the amendment still remained only in the domain of the jurisdiction and power of revision and no further. the amending provision therefore only related to procedure and not to any rights of the parties. sharing of profits and contributing to losses were not the only elements in a partnership existence of agency was essential and whether there was a partnership or not is a mixed question of law and fact depending upon the varying circumstances in different cases. this view was reiterated by chief justice beaumont in chimanram motilal and another vs jayantilal chhaganlal and another a i r 1939 bombay 410 1939 indlaw mum 155 ramaswami j in mohammed musa sahib dead and others vs n k mohammed ghouse sahib and another a i r 1959 madras 379 1958 indlaw mad 820 observed that whether the relation of partnership between two or more persons does or does not exit must depend on the real intention and contract of the parties and not merely on their expressed intention. in the instant case judged by the aforesaid principles of section 4 of partnership act it is possible to hold that there was a partnership of which the appellant was a partner the court of small causes considered these principles evaluated the evidence and held that there was in fact and in law a partnership such a view was not an impossible one or a perverse one. if that was so there was nothing that could be clone about such a view within the ambit and scope of the power of section 292 of the rent act. 