this order is made on the assumption that the petitioners are minority institutions. according to the petitioner in that case the medical college run by it at vellore in the state of tamil nadu is a well reputed institution admission to which is made on the basis of all india entrance test conducted by the petitioner and that the admissions are made on the basis of merit and the fee charged by it is not more than the fees chargeable in similar governmental institutions and that there has never been any complaint about the working of this institution. since the entire expenditure of the colleges is borne by the state the entire fees collected are also made over to the state these colleges must be required to draw the students even with respect to the seats to be filled by the management from out of the state merit list if any. in the absence of such list they can themselves devise the method for such selection. we make it clear that regarding the character of these institutions whether they are minority educational institutions we express no opinion. that is a matter between the institutions and the government of kerala. this court in keshav chandra joshi v union of india 1990 indlaw sc 270 in which this court had directed to determine inter se seniority of the direct recruits and promotee asstt conservators forests u p. in k c joshi case it was concluded that the promotees were appointed on ad hoc basis as a stop gap arrangement in substantive posts. until they are appointed by the governor according to the rules they do not become the members of the service in a substantive capacity. their continuous length of ad hoc service from the date of their initial appointment can not be counted towards seniority. the direct recruits were appointed in accordance with rule 5a read with appendix a of u p forest service rules1952 for short the rules. their seniority shall be counted from the date of their discharging duties of the post of asstt conservators forest and the seniority of direct recruits shall accordingly be fixed. the governor was directed to make appointment by promotion to substantive vacancies to the post of asstt conservators forest if not already made in accordance with rule 5b read with appendix b and rule 6. we are informed that till date no appointments in terms thereof have been made. the seniority of the promotee asstt conservators forest shall be counted from the respective dates of appointment to the substantive posts in their quota under rule 6 of the rules. the inter se seniority of the direct recruits and promotees shall be determined in accordance with rules 56 and 24 as per the judgment in k c joshi case. all the employees are entitled to all consequential benefits. the direct recruits would go en block as seniors to the promotees and the promotee officers in the order of their inter se seniority be appointed by the governor under rule 5b read with rule 6 and would be placed below the direct recruits. similar exercise for each year in which the substantive vacancies had arisen should be done. the officers he they direct recruits or promotees would rank below the juniormost officer in the list of the previous year. after this exercise is exhausted appointments should be made posts are to be filled up to substantive vacancies. 