that the incident arose out of a petty altercation between a 11 and his three companions with pw 10 and his three companions at the video parlour and later on led in the homicidal death of popat band patte on 11 august 1990 and injuries to pw9 and pw14 was neither disputed before the learned designated court nor before the present court. from the post mortem report the deceased had four incised injuries which had caused extensive damage to his internal organs. the testimony of pw9 to pw 15 regarding the incident at the video parlour is cogent and trustworthy and nothing has been brought out during the cross examination of these witnesses which may cast any doubt about the correctness of the version given by them regarding the incident at the video parlour. the designated court rightly found the participation of a 1a 5a 8a 9 and a 11in the assault to have been positively established however so far as a 10 is concerned there is merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the appellant that his identify and participation in the assault has not been established beyond a reasonable doubt. the name of a 10 does not figure specifically in the statement of baban pw 9which formed the basis of the fir. the prosecution has been able to establish its case against a 5a 8a 9 and a 11 and the deceased a 1 beyond a reasonable doubt. the designated court fell in error in holding that an offence under section 3 of tada had been committed by the accused appellants in the established facts and circumstances of this case. merely because the deceased and the two injured witnesses belong to wadar community no inference could be drawn that the attack by the appellants on them was intended to strike terror in a section of the society namely the wadar community. appellants no 1 a 52 a 83 a 9 and 5 a 11 had alongwith the deceased accused a 1 and some others about whose identity there has been some doubt formed an unlawful assembly and in furtherance of the common object of that assembly committed the murder of popat deceased besides causing injuries to pw9 and pw14. in the result the appeal succeeds insofar as a 10 appellant no 4 is concerned. he is given the benefit of doubt and acquitted of all the charges against him. he shall be released from custody forthwith if not required in any other case. the conviction and sentence of appellants no 123 and 5 for the offence under section 3 tada is also set aside but their conviction and sentence for the other offences as recorded by the designated court is upheld and to that extent their appeals fail. section 19 of tada shows that an appeal against the judgment sentence or order of the designated court except an interlocutory order shall lie on facts and on law to the supreme court and that no appeal or revision shall lie to any other court. in the face of this express provision there is no scope to urge that the appeal may be transferred to the high court because of the acquittal of the appellants for the offence punishable under section 3 tada. under section 12 of tada the designated court has the jurisdiction not only to try the cases under tada but also to try offences under the indian penal code if the offence under tada is connected with such other offences. the amplitude of powers available to this court under article 142 of the constitution of india is normally speaking not conditioned by any statutory provision but it can not be lost sight of that this court exercises jurisdiction under article 142 of the constitution with a view to do justice between the parties but not in disregard of the relevant statutory provisions. the transfer of the appeal to the high court after hearing the appeal on merits and finding that section 3 of tada on the basis of the evidence led by the prosecution was not made out is neither desirable nor proper nor permissible let alone justified. 