in de smith woolf and jowells judicial review of administrative action5th edn after detailed discussion the learned authors have summarized the position with the following propositions. 1 the test of whether a body is performing a public function and is hence amenable to judicial review may not depend upon the source of its power or whether the body is ostensibly a public or a private body. 2 the principles of judicial review prima facie govern the activities of bodies performing public functions. however not all decisions taken by bodies in the course of their public functions are the subject matter of judicial review. what is relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on that body. in the following two situations judicial review will not normally be appropriate even though the body may be performing a public function. a where some other branch of the law more appropriately governs the dispute between the parties. in such a case that branch of the law and its remedies should and normally will be applied. and b where there is a contract between the litigants in such a case the express or implied terms of the agreement should normally govern the matter. thus where a special method of resolving disputes such as arbitration or resolution by private or domestic tribunals has been agreed by the parties expressly or by necessary implicationthat regime and not judicial review will normally govern the dispute. the high court has relied very strongly on the decision of a learned single judge in t gattaiahs case wherein it was stated that a writ may lie under article 226 of the constitution against a company incorporated under the companies act1956 as it is permissible to issue a writ against any person. in parimal chandra rahas case the court held that when the duty had been enjoined on the appellant to provide and maintain a canteen facility under the factories act it becomes the obligation of the appellant to establish a canteen and that is what the appellant had done therefore when that work is got done through somebody else by providing the necessary infrastructure and other facilities when the personnel did not change though the contractors changed from time to time he held that they become employees of the appellant. in anadi muktas case this court examined the various aspects and the distinction between an authority and a person and after analysis of the decisions referred in that regard came to the conclusion that it is only in the circumstances when the authority or the person performs a public function or discharges a public duty article 226 of the constitution can be invoked. in the present case the appellant is engaged in the manufacture and sale of cigarettes. manufacture and sale of cigarettes will not involve any public function. incidental to that activity there is an obligation under section 46 of the act to set up a canteen when the establishment has more than 250 workmen. that means it is a condition of service in relation to a workman providing better facilities to workmen to discharge their duties properly and maintain their own health or welfare. the findings recorded by the learned single judge on examination of the facts available is that there had been a canteen within the premises of the appellant up to the year 1982 and it is only from 1982 onwards the management of the canteen has been entrusted to a private contractor that even after change of the contractor the canteen workers have continued to be the same irrespective of the change in the contractors from time to time that wages were paid to the workmen in the canteen by the management through the contractor that the appellant has provided the accommodation furniture fuel electricity utensils etc that the management exercises control over the standard in quality quantity and the rate of the food items supplied to the workmen for whose benefit the canteen is established. thus these circumstances clearly indicate that the appellant has a complete control over the activities in respect of the canteen and the contractor has absolutely no discretion either in regard to the menu quality and quantity of the food items much less the rate at which the same are supplied to the workmen. when the management of the appellant exercises such a complete control the canteen shall be deemed to be run by the management itself. the appellant in any manner can not controvert these facts. there is no material on record to show that the canteen is located in such an area where it would be hazardous to have a fire furnace source of heat or light to cook food. 