there was no copy right attached to any idea but copy right is attached to the work and what is important is that not only the idea of producing the suit serial on tv came to the mind of respondent no 2 but he had already started working on it in advance and forwarded it to doordarshan for its approval. the respondents were not the agents of the petitioners for the purpose of producing the said serial. the aggregate amount of rs 76 50 lakhs which was paid to the respondents for 60 episodes is not the amount for cost of production but the fixed price for sponsoring the said serial in order to link up their advertisement with the serial and avail substantial benefit of concessional rate under the scheme envisaged by doordarshan. the respondents have not undertaken the production of the said serial at the instance of the petitioners. the petitioners had agreed to sponsor only 26 episodes whereas the respondents had agreed to produce 52 episodes and had given a firm commitment to that effect to doordarshan. that the titles of each episode indicated that respondent no 2 is the producer of the said serial and the petitioners are only the sponsors. however the titles continued to show mr s s oberoi as the producer of the serial and the petitioners did not withhold payments. the production work had been started by the respondents at the behest of the petitioners. doordarshan recognizes the respondents as producers of the said serial and recognize the petitioners as sponsors only. there was no transfer of rights in favour of the petitioners by the respondents in the aforesaid letters and no consideration whatsoever was paid to the respondents for issuing the said letters which have no legal consequences. the respondents were not liable to render accounts to the petitioners who paid them a fixed sum for sponsoring the programme. if the expenses were less the petitioners did not ask for a refund and the profit or loss was entirely of the respondents. it is clear that the bills that have been raised were only to accommodate the petitioners from the circumstances narrated above. it is probable that the respondents had obliged the petitioners by issuing these bills because the bills can not be read in isolation but with reference to surrounding circumstances. where s 17 of the copyright act is concerned it is clear that the petitioners were not able to establish that the respondent nos 1 to 4 produced the said serial 1 as the agents of the petitioners 2 in the course of their employment with the petitioners 3 for valuable consideration paid by the petitioners to them and iv at the instance of the petitioners. when these factors had not been established and the suit is itself not dependent on the interpretation of s 17 of the copyright act pleadings and issues raised did not attract the same. on appreciation of evidence the court has come to the conclusion that the respondents did not make the said serial for valuable consideration at the instance of the petitioners and in view of the findings of fact the claim of copyright or ownership in respect of the serial u s 17b and c would not arise at all. 