from the medical evidence and from the chemical examiner 's reports that the vaginal swab and clothes taken from the dead body did indicate the presence of semen. there is however absolutely no evidence to suggest even assuming that the intercourse had been committed by the appellant that he had done so without mukhtiar kaur 's consent or against her will. the investigators had made no attempt whatsoever to have the appellant medically examined to ascertain his capacity to perform sexual intercourse. whether a chain is complete or not would depend on the facts of each case emanating from the evidence and no universal yardstick should ever be attempted. a few facts stand out from the prosecution story. first the place of incident being adjoining rooms in the residential house of the appellant and the fact that the alleged murder weapon is his licensed dbbl gun is proved on record. the evidence also reveals that the appellant was living in the premises along with his wife mother and son and two daughters who were studying outside the village were frequent visitors but it is the admitted position that nobody but the appellant and the deceased were present at the time of incident. it is also clear from the evidence that the two spent cartridge cases recovered one from near mukhtiar kaur 's dead body and the second from the right barrel of the gun lying near the appellant had been sent to the forensic science laboratory which opined that one of the cartridges had been fired from the gun and the other could have been fired therefrom. in a case relating to circumstantial evidence motive does assume great importance but to say that the absence of motive would dislodge the entire prosecution story is perhaps giving this one factor an importance which is not due and to use the clichi the motive is in the mind of the accused and can seldom be fathomed with any degree of accuracy. there is however a hint in the testimony of inspector harjinder pal singh that his enquiries had revealed that the accused was having illicit relations with mukhtiar kaur and the court can assume that something untoward had happened which could have triggered the volatile and hostile incident. there could perhaps be some truth in this suggestion as it is significant that though the appellant had an extended family living with him i e mother wife son living in the village and two young daughters who were studying outside and residing in a hostel but were frequent visitors home yet none of them has come forth to depose in his favour. the shot had apparently travelled upwards skirting the mandible through the flesh of the cheek in an upward direction with minimal damage to the bone structure and it is indeed providential that the appellant got away with only an injury albeit a very serious one. the fact that the shot was fired from below going upwards is also supported by the site plan exhibit pjj wherein marks of a shot hitting the roof were seen at point e whereas the appellant was found lying at point d in the same room. it is therefore apparent that the weapon had indeed been fired by the appellant from a close range and that the blackened portion around the wound had been removed. it is generally for the prosecution to prove its case beyond doubt but in circumstances such as the present one some explanation is also due from an accused in order to absolve himself from suspicion of the crime. no part of the evidence of the hostile witnesses comes to the aid of the appellant. the question now arises as to the sentence that should be imposed on the appellant. it would be seen that both the sessions court and the high court were appalled by the allegations and findings of incestuous rape and murder. the court is however of the opinion as already noted above that a case of rape has not been made out. in this background the death sentence is not called for. 