the writ petition was styled u art 227 of the constitution is of no consequence. it is the nature of the relief sought for and the controversy involved which determines the article which is applicable. the high court 's order is unsustainable. the high court did not consider the nature of the controversy and the prayer involved in the writ petition. by art 226 the power of issuing prerogative writs possessed by the chartered high courts prior to the commencement of the constitution has been made wider and more extensive and conferred upon every high court. in umaji keshao meshram vs radhikabai air 1986 sc 1272 1986 indlaw sc 651 it was noted that under article 226 an order direction or writ is to issue to a person authority or the state. in a proceeding under that article the person authority or state against whom the direction order or writ is sought is a necessary party. under article 227however what comes up before the high court is the order or judgment of a subordinate court or tribunal for the purpose of ascertaining whether in giving such judgment or order that subordinate court or tribunal has acted within its authority and according to law. the nature of the exercise of the power under article 226however remains the same as in the case of the power of issuing prerogative writs possessed by the chartered high courts. it was open to the respondent to invoke the jurisdiction of the high court both u arts 226 and 227 of the constitution of india. once such a jurisdiction was invoked and when his writ petition was dismissed on merits it can not be said that the learned single judge had exercised his jurisdiction only u art 226 of the constitution of india. this conclusion directly flows from the relevant averments made in the writ petition and the nature of jurisdiction invoked by the respondent as noted by the learned single judge in his judgment as seen earlier. consequently it could not be said that cl 15 of the letters patent was not attracted for preferring appeal against the judgment of the learned single judge. it is also necessary to note that the appellant being the respondent in letters patent appeal joined issues on merits and did not take up the contention that the letters patent appeal was not maintainable. for all these reasons therefore the primary objection to the maintainability of the letters patent appeal as canvassed by learned counsel for the appellant has to be repelled. the high court was not justified in holding that the letters patent appeal was not maintainable. in addition a bare reading of this court 's earlier order shows that the impugned order is clearly erroneous. in surya dev rai v ram chander rai amp ors air 2003 sc 3044 2003 indlaw sc 598 after referring to decisions in custodian of evacuee property bangalore v khan saheb abdul shukoor etc 1961 3 scr 855 1961 indlaw sc 499 and nagendra nath bora amp anr v commissioner of hills division air 1958 sc 398 1958 indlaw sc 62t c basappa v t nagappa air 1954 sc 440 1954 indlaw sc 39 and rupa ashok hurra v ashok hurra air 2002 sc 1771 2002 indlaw sc 1966this court held that from the aforesaid enunciation of law it is quite vivid and luminescent that the pleadings in the writ petition nature of the order passed by the learned single judge character and the contour of the order directions issued nomenclature given the jurisdictional prospective in the constitutional context are to be perceived. it can not be said in a hypertechnical manner that an order passed in a writ petition if there is assail to the order emerging from the inferior tribunal or subordinate court has to be treated all the time for all purposes to be u art 227 of the constitution of india. 