the court noticed that the provisions of the bombay town planning rules1955 for short the bombay rules are in pari materia with the rules. a town planning scheme therefore envisages calling for objection from the persons concerned for three purposes i in regard to draft scheme ii lodging of any claim for payment of compensation iii participation in the matter of allotment of final plots. in jaswantsingh mathurasingh1991 indlaw sc 972 suprait was reiterated that a tenant or a sub tenant is a person interested and is entitled to notice. in that context it was held the question is whether the tenant or a sub tenant is a person interested and is entitled to notice it is obvious that u s 105 of transfer of property act a lease creates right or an interest in enjoyment of the demised property and a tenant or a sub tenant is entitled to remain in possession of the demised property until the lease is duly terminated and eviction takes place in accordance with law. therefore a tenant or a sub tenant in possession of a tenement in the town planning scheme is a person interested within the meaning of rules 213 and 4 of the rules. whether irrespective of rule 26 of the rules which prescribes for issuance of a general public notice any special notice upon the appellant was required to be served by the state or by the authority in our opinion cannot be gone into by us in these proceedings for the first time. validity of rule 26 of the rules had never been questioned. it had also not been contended that the said rule is ultra vires s 52 of the act. respondent no 4 was owner of both plot nos 177 and 178. he was therefore in his own right entitled to final allotment of some plot. a person may waive a right either expressly or by necessary implication. he may in a given case disentitle himself from obtaining an equitable relief particularly when he allows a thing to come to an irreversible situation. different statutes provide for different manner of service of notice. when a statute makes an elaborate provision as regards the formalities required to be undergone at every stage by the local authority the state government and other authorities concerned in preparing and making the final town planning scheme the same should be considered to be exhaustively. the following are not in dispute. a appellant although filed an objection with regard to the draft scheme did not choose to pursue it. b he did not file objections for re allotment and did not participate in the proceedings following acquisition instituted by the authorities under the act. in view of the above the issue is whether it was open to him to assert his purported right to special notice in respect of the final allotment in the instant case given the fact that he did not pursue his objections to the draft scheme and subsequently did not object participate during the proceedings for re allotment. under rule 26 of the rules applicable in the instant case as distinguished from the bombay rules wherein special notice is requiredno special notice is mandatorily required to be served. assuming however that it was obligatory for the state to issue notice to the appellant the question is whether the principle of waiver precludes him from claiming equitable relief in this case due to his earlier conduct which allowed the entire process of acquisition and allotment to become final. the court of the opinion that even if he had any such right he waived the same. it is true that waiver can not always and in every case be inferred merely from the failure of the party to take the objection. waiver can be inferred only if and after it is shown that the party knew about the relevant facts and was aware of his right to take the objection. waiver or acquiescence like election presupposes that the person to be bound is fully cognizant of his rights and that being so he neglects to enforce them or chooses one benefit instead of another either but not both of which he might claim. the legal principle emerging from these decisions is also stated in craies on statute law 6th edn at page 369 is that as a general rule the conditions imposed by statutes which authorise legal proceedings are treated as being indispensable to giving the court jurisdiction but if it appears that the statutory conditions were inserted by the legislature simply for the security or benefit of the parties to the action themselves and that no public interests are involved such conditions will not be considered as indispensable and either party may waive them without affecting the jurisdiction of the court. it must be held that the benefit of notice provided under the act and rules being for the benefit of the appellant in which no public interests are involved he has waived the same. it may safely be stated that the appellant through his conduct has waived his right to an equitable remedy in the instant case. such conduct precludes and operates as estoppel against him with respect to asserting a right over a portion of the acquired land in a situation where the scheme in question has attained finality following as a result of the appellant 's inaction. 