the starting point of the incident in question as indicated from the evidence on record is the hall where apparently a dispute started between the parties with regard to the electricity connection in the house. the deceased tried to put off the light of one particular room at which the appellant and other accused persons became annoyed and the appellant switched on the light which was again switched off by the deceased. at this the deceased became annoyed and the appellant removed the fuse of the electricity which act of his plunged the entire house into darkness. it is also clear and established that thereafter a lamp was brought by accused no 3 to the room besides another lamp which was already burning in the said room itself. but in any case there was an electricity light post in the front of the house which was giving enough light to the house. there is also evidence on record to show that even outsiders were watching the incident from the road which indicates that there was sufficient light for them to see what was happening in the house where the incident had taken place. there was indeed some scuffle between the parties during the course of which accused no 1 received simple injuries and the deceased died of the two stab injuries inflicted by the present appellant. he in his deposition specifically stated that he found that the back door as well as the front door of the house were latched from inside and in front of the house there was a road where there was an electricity pole and there was a street tube light by which the house could be visible and even the lights of the vehicles were flashed at the house. he stated that although the house had electricity connection but was not having the electricity supply. he gave instructions to his subordinate and also to the people around that nobody should touch any article lying at the scene of occurrence. he stated that he made preliminary enquiry and brought yashoda and her two daughters to the police station and sent two other officers in search of accused nos 1 and 2 who were not found in the house. he also stated that he got the complaint registered at the police station which was lodged by pw 1 and that on the next day he again went to the scene of offence and seized the properties involved in the crime which were sealed. he also recovered the knife at the instance of accused sharmila which he seized on 28 04 1988 that is after about 9 days of the incident accused nos 1 and 2 surrendered before the police and on their surrender they were taken into custody it was found that accused no 1 was having injury on his back and he was medically examined. on medical examination his injury was found to be simple. even assuming that pw 21 the investigating officer could have entered the aforesaid information received from psi of panaji police station in the general diary yet they said entry could not have been held or treated to be an fir. the information received by him was very cryptic and without any detail about the incident in question and therefore in any case there was no possibility of recording an fir at that stage. the place of occurrence was in total darkness and even the persons belonging to the complainant side were not available therefore bringing them to the police station where there was sufficient light and recording the complaint at 3 00 a m can not in any manner cast any doubt on the veracity of the prosecution case. in that view of the matter it can not be said that the fir was in any manner hit by the provisions of section 162 of crpc. besides all the aforesaid eye witnesses were inmates of the house and they would know as to who had given the blows for they specifically stated that initially the appellant did not have the knife in his hand but when the deceased and others went to the balcony then he went inside the house and brought a knife with which he gave stab injuries to the deceased which became fatal and as a result of which the deceased died while he was being taken to the hospital. the aforesaid eye witnesses although are related witnesses were natural witnesses for they were the inmates of the house where the incident had taken place. the said eye witnesses are consistent about the principal act of the appellant in stabbing the deceased. the discrepancies which were sought to be pointed out are minor discrepancies without in any manner affecting the substratum of the prosecution case and therefore minor discrepancies in the evidence of the eye witnesses are immaterial. all the contentions raised by learned counsel appearing for the appellant were considered by us in the light of evidence on record and we find that none of the aforesaid submissions has any basis. there is cogent and reliable evidence on record to prove and establish that the accused has committed the act of stabbing as a result of which the deceased had died. before dwelling further into the factual matrix of the case on the basis of which the high court convicted the appellant section 302 ipc it would be useful to briefly recapitulate the law on the point. that being the well settled legal position when we test the factual background of the present case on the principles laid down by this court in the aforesaid decisions we are unable to agree with the views taken by the high court. as already noted it is quite clear from the record that there was an altercation preceding the incident. the place of occurrence is a residence inhabited by both the parties and there is no evidence on record that the deceased was armed with any weapon. initially the accused appellant also did not have any weapon with him but during the course of the incident he went inside and got a knife with the help of which he stabbed the deceased pw 7 in his cross examination has categorically stated that death due to stab injury was in consequence of injury no 1 and all other injuries were superficial in nature. so it was only injury no 1 which was fatal in nature. factually therefore there was only one main injury caused due to stabbing and that also was given on the back side of the deceased and therefore it can not be said that there was any intention to kill or to inflict an injury of a particular degree of seriousness. records clearly establish that there was indeed a scuffle between the parties with regard to the availability of electricity in a particular room and during the course of scuffle the appellant also received an injury which was simple in nature and that there was heated exchange of words and scuffle between the parties before the actual incident of stabbing took place. there is therefore provocation and the incident happened at the spur of the moment. that being the factual position we are of the considered view that the present case can not be said to be a case section 302 ipc but it is a case falling under section 304 part ii ipc. it is trite law that section 304 part ii comes into play when the death is caused by doing an act with knowledge that it is likely to cause death but there is no intention on the part of the accused either to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. in the case of abdul waheed khan vs state of a p 2002 7 scc 175 2002 indlaw sc 1777 observed as follows at page 184 cl b of section 299 corresponds with cls 2 and 3 of section 300. the distinguishing feature of the mens rea requisite u cl 2 is the knowledge possessed by the offender regarding the particular victim being in such a peculiar condition or state of health that the internal harm caused to him is likely to be fatal notwithstanding the fact that such harm would not in the ordinary way of nature be sufficient to cause death of a person in normal health or condition. it is noteworthy that the intention to cause death is not an essential requirement of cl 2. only the intention of causing the bodily injury coupled with the offender 's knowledge of the likelihood of such injury causing the death of the particular victim is sufficient to bring the killing within the ambit of this clause. this aspect of cl 2 is borne out by illustration b appended to section 300 14 cl b of section 299 does not postulate any such knowledge on the part of the offender. 