the special court framed a charge only for an offence u s 376 ipc and after trial convicted the respondent u s 376 ipc and sentenced him to ten years imprisonment. the high court set aside the conviction on the technical ground that the trial court had no jurisdiction as it was a special court specified in under the sc amp st prevention of atrocities act. this court reversed the decision of the high court on the ground that a special court under the act being a sessions court it continued to have jurisdiction to try the case for the offence u s 376 ipc. that matter was considered u s 465 of the code and not relevant on the facts of this case. the charge was that appellant committed trespass into the house of prakashi devi for assaulting prakashi devi and assaulted the said prakashi devi and outraged her modesty. the accused concentrated his cross examination with reference to the said charge and elicited answers showing that he did not assault or outrage the modesty of prakashi devi. he did not try to challenge the evidence let in to show that he had tried to outrage the modesty of sheela devi as he was not charged with such an offence. the evidence of pw 1 and pw 2 was that the appellant did not touch or tease or abuse prakashi devi. when the accused is charged with having entered the house of prakashi devi and assaulted the said prakashi devi with intent to outrage her modesty and when the accused defended himself in regard to the said charge and concentrated on proving that the said charges were not true he can not be convicted for having assaulted and outraging the modesty of someone else namely sheela devi. the accused did not have any opportunity to meet or defend himself against the charge that he assaulted sheela devi and outraged her modesty. nor did he proceed with his defence on the understanding that he was being charged with having committed the offence with reference to sheela devi. one of the fundamental principles of justice is that an accused should know what is the charge against him so that he can build his defence in regard to that charge. applying the guidance offered by the said illustrations and the legal principles evolved by this court the position will be as follows if sheela devi alone had been present at the house at the time of the incident and the accused had assaulted and outraged the modesty of the said sheela devi but in the charge the name of the victim had been erroneously mentioned say as sushila devi or prakashi devi though there was no person by such nameand the inquiry exclusively referred to the assault and outraging the modesty of sheela devi the court could infer that the accused was not misled and the error in the charge was immaterial. the court having charged the accused with the offence of having trespassed into the house of prakashi devi with intent to assault her and having further charged him for having assaulted the said prakashi devi by outraging her modesty convicts him on the ground that though he did not assault or outrage the modesty of prakashi devi he had outraged the modesty of sheela devi that would lead to failure of justice. there was a material error in the charge as it violated the requirement of sub s 1 of s 212 of the code that the charge shall contain particulars as to the person against whom the offence was committed. there were two women present at the house at the time of the alleged incident namely prakashi devi and her daughter in law sheela devi. in view of the specific charge the accused concentrated on showing that the charge was false. he did not attempt to meet the case made out in the trial that the offence was against sheela devi. the accused was thus clearly misled by the error in the charge which caused prejudiced to the accused thereby occasioning failure of justice. therefore we are of the view that there should be a new trial after charging him with the offence of outraging the modesty of sheela devi. 