in connection with land acquisition proceeding whenever the provision of s 17 and its various sub sections including s 174 is used in the name of taking urgent or emergent action and the right of hearing of the land holder under section 5a is dispensed with the court is called upon to consider a few fundamentals in the exercise of such powers. the concept of public purpose in land acquisition has to be viewed from an angle which is consistent with the concept of a welfare state. the concept of public purpose can not remain static for all time to come. the concept even though sought to be defined u s 3f of the act is not capable of any precise definition. the said definition having suffered several amendments has assumed the character of an inclusive one. it must be accepted that in construing public purpose a broad and overall view has to be taken and the focus must be on ensuring maximum benefit to the largest number of people. any attempt by the state to acquire land by promoting a public purpose to benefit a particular group of people or to serve any particular interest at the cost of the interest of a large section of people especially of the common people defeats the very concept of public purpose. even though the concept of public purpose was introduced by pre constitutional legislation its application must be consistent with the constitutional ethos and especially the chapter under fundamental rights and also the directive principles. the mandate of art 13 of the constitution that any pre constitutional law can not in any way take away or abridge rights conferred under part iii must be kept in mind. by judicial interpretation the contents of these part iii rights are constantly expanded. the meaning of public purpose in acquisition of land must be judged on the touchstone of this expanded view of part iii rights. the courts must examine these questions very carefully when little indians lose their small property in the name of mindless acquisition at the instance of the state. if public purpose can be satisfied by not rendering common man homeless and by exploring other avenues of acquisition the courts before sanctioning an acquisition must in exercise of its power of judicial review focus its attention on the concept of social and economic justice. while examining these questions of public importance the courts especially the higher courts cannot afford to act as mere umpires. the construction of jail is certainly in public interest and for such construction land may be acquired. but such acquisition can be made only by strictly following the mandate of the said act. in the facts of this case such acquisition can not be made by invoking emergency provisions of s 17. if so advised government can initiate acquisition proceeding by following the provision of section 5a of the act and in accordance with law. 