there is no dispute as regards the date of occurrence and the date of conviction passed by the trial court and affirmed by the high court. inasmuch as the conviction on both counts have been confirmed by this court and we are confined to sentence part alone and in view of the minimum sentence prescribed u ss 7 and 13 of the act we are of the view that though long delay may be a ground for reduction of sentence in other cases the same may not be applicable to the case on hand when the statute prescribes minimum sentence. about the request based on delay that the appellant has lost his job undergone the ordeal all along etc. a lenient view be taken in this case it is useful to refer decision of this court in state of m p vs shambhu dayal nagar2006 8 scc 693 2006 indlaw sc 716 wherein it was held that it is difficult to accept the prayer of the respondent that a lenient view be taken in this case. the corruption by public servants has become a gigantic problem. it has spread everywhere. no facet of public activity has been left unaffected by the stink of corruption. it has deep and pervasive impact on the functioning of the entire country. large scale corruption retards the nation building activities and everyone has to suffer on that count. similar claim based on art 142 has been negatived in several decisions by this court we need to refer only the latest decision of this court in manish goel vs rohini goel2010 4 scc 393 2010 indlaw sc 301. the facts in that case are that the parties by persuasion of the family members and friends entered into a compromise and prepared a memorandum of understanding dated 13 11 2009in the proceedings pending before the mediation centre delhi by which they agreed on terms and conditions incorporated therein to settle all their disputes and also for dissolution of their marriage. the parties filed an application under section 13 b1 of the hindu marriage act1955 before the family court delhi seeking divorce by mutual consent. the constitution benches of this court in supreme court bar assn v union of india 1998 4 scc 409 1998 indlaw sc 688 and e s p rajaram v union of india 2001 2 scc 186 2001 indlaw sc 20411 held that u art 142 of the constitution this court can not altogether ignore the substantive provisions of a statute and pass orders concerning an issue which can be settled only through a mechanism prescribed in another statute. it is not to be exercised in a case where there is no basis in law which can form an edifice for building up a superstructure. in mota ram vs state of haryana2009 12 scc 727 2009 indlaw sc 682this court while reiterating the above principles has concluded that art 142 can not be exercised to negate the statutory provisions. in academy of nutrition improvement and others vs union of india jt 2011 8 sc 16 2011 indlaw sc 515the following conclusion about the applicability of art 142 is relevant the question is having held that rule 44i to be invalid whether we can permit the continuation of the ban on sale of non iodised salt for human consumption for any period art 142 of the constitution vests unfettered independent jurisdiction to pass any order in public interest to do complete justice if exercise of such jurisdiction is not be contrary to any express provision of law. though the jurisdiction of this court u art 142 of the constitution of india is not in dispute we make it clear that exercise of such power would however depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. the high court in exercise of its jurisdiction u s 482 of the criminal procedure code and this court u art 142 of the constitution would not ordinarily direct quashing of a case involving crime against the society particularly when both the trial court as also the high court have found that the charge leveled against the appellant under the act has been made out and proved by the prosecution by placing acceptable evidence. the orders do not disclose any factual details and the relevant provisions under which the accused was charged convicted and minimum sentence if any as available in the act as well as the period already undergone. from the analysis of the above decisions and the concerned provisions with which we are concerned the following principles emerge. a when the court issues notice confining to particular aspect sentence arguments will be heard only to that extent unless some extraordinary circumstance material is shown to the court for arguing the matter on all aspects. b long delay in disposal of appeal or any other factor may not be a ground for reduction of sentence particularly when the statute prescribes minimum sentence in other cases where no such minimum sentence is prescribed it is open to the court to consider the delay and its effect and the ultimate decision c in a case of corruption by public servant quantum of amount is immaterial ultimately it depends upon the conduct of the delinquent and the proof regarding demand and acceptance established by the prosecution. d merely because the delinquent lost his job due to conviction under the act may not be a mitigating circumstance for reduction of sentence particularly when the statute prescribes minimum sentence. e though art 142 of the constitution gives wider power to this court waiver of certain period as prescribed in the statute imposing lesser sentence than the minimum prescribed is not permissible. f an order which this court can make in order to do complete justice between the parties must not only be consistent with the fundamental rights guaranteed by the constitution but also it can not even be inconsistent with the substantive provisions of the relevant statute. g in exercise of the power u art 142 of the constitution this court generally does not pass an order in contravention of or ignoring the statutory provisions nor is the power exercised merely on sympathy. h the power u art 142 of the constitution is a constitutional power and not restricted by statutory enactments. however this court would not pass any order u art 142 which would amount to supplant the substantive law applicable or ignoring statutory provisions dealing with the subject. in other words acting under article 142this court can not pass an order or grant relief which is totally inconsistent or goes against the substantive or statutory enactments pertaining to the case. i the powers u art 142 are not meant to be exercised when their exercise may come directly in conflict with what has been expressly provided for in statute dealing expressly with the subject. 