the company was under heavy arrears as on 3rd january1977 therefore the district collector meerut appointed the receiver. subsequently sugar mill of the company was acquired on 28th october1984 under sugar undertakings acquisition act1971 and the unit was vested with the u p state sugar corporation. it is also not in dispute that labour and other dues were payable by the company apart from sale tax dues and the loan was given by the state government between 1977 1984 for payment of such dues. the high court though noticed that s 8 of the u p state sugar undertakings acquisition act1971 empowers the prescribed authority to decide any dispute regarding the amount payable to any person or authority in respect of earlier liabilities of the undertaking but it wrongly held that in view of the provisions of the u p sugar undertakings acquisition act1971 any liability incurred by the company or loan etc taken by the receiver is not payable by the company. it is always open to the competent authority to seek recovery of the amount if due from the company or to adjust the dues. the court heard the parties only on the limited question as to why the amount which has been directed to be refunded to the auction purchasers appellants herein should not bear reasonable interest. one can not hold of any statute entitling the auction purchasers to claim interest in case the auction got cancelled or set aside by the court of law. counsel for the parties also could not refer any of the clauses of auction prescribing interest on refund of amount in case of cancellation of auction or sale. in state of maharashtra and others vs maimuma banu and others2003 7 scc 448 2003 indlaw sc 625the question arose as to whether interest was payable on rental compensation. in the said case government resolution provided for payment of rental compensation expeditiously but no provision was made to pay interest in case of delayed payment. this court in the said case held that the crucial question is whether there can be any direction for interest on rental compensation once it is held that the same has to be paid within the time frame notwithstanding the fact that there is no statutory obligation. appeals are allowed to the extent indicated without any stipulation of costs. taking into consideration the aforesaid factor while working out equities it would therefore be appropriate to direct the state to pay interest at the rate of 6 on the amount to be refunded as per the high court 's order. 