evidence of pws 5 and 6 is amply corroborated by medical evidence. pws 5 and 6 being injured witnesses their evidence is entitled to great weight cogent and convincing grounds are required to discard the evidence of injured witnesses. in the light of the fact that pws 5 and 6 were injured witnesses courts below tested their evidence for its credibility and recorded concurrent findings that pws 5 and 6 are trustworthy witnesses. for the purpose of conviction section 307 ipc prosecution has to establish i the intention to commit murder and ii the act done by the accused. the burden is on the prosecution that accused had attempted to commit the murder of the prosecution witness. to justify a conviction section 307 ipc it is not essential that fatal injury capable of causing death should have been caused. although the nature of injury actually caused may be of assistance in coming to a finding as to the intention of the accused such intention may also be adduced from other circumstances. the intention of the accused is to be gathered from the circumstances like the nature of the weapon used words used by the accused at the time of the incident motive of the accused parts of the body where the injury was caused and the nature of injury and severity of the blows given etc. in the case of state of m p vs kashiram amp ors air 2009 sc 1642  2009 4 scc 26 2009 indlaw sc 92 the scope of intention for attracting conviction section 307 ipc was elaborated and it was held as under it is sufficient to justify a conviction section 307 if there is present an intent coupled with some overt act in execution thereof. it is not essential that bodily injury capable of causing death should have been inflicted. the section makes a distinction between the act of the accused and its result if any. the court has to see whether the act irrespective of its result was done with the intention or knowledge and under circumstances mentioned in the section therefore an accused charged section 307 ipc can not be acquitted merely because the injuries inflicted on the victim were in the nature of a simple hurt. having regard to the weapon used for causing the head injuries to sukhbir nature of injures situs of the injury and the severity of the blows courts below recorded concurrent findings convicting the 2nd appellant section 307 ipc. the conviction of the second appellant rajbir raju section 307 ipc is unassailable. for the conviction section 307 ipc courts below imposed upon the 2nd appellant rigorous imprisonment of five years while imposing punishment courts have an obligation to award appropriate punishment. question of awarding sentence is a matter of discretion and the same has to be exercised by the courts taking into consideration all the relevant circumstances. what sentence would meet the ends of justice would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case and the courts must keep in mind the gravity of the offence motive for the crime nature of the offence and all other attendant circumstances. injured sukhbir sustained grievous head injuries and was deeply comatose and was in a state of shock and trauma. having regard to the fact that the occurrence was of the year 1994 considering the other facts and circumstances of the case the sentence of imprisonment imposed on jage ram a 1 madan a 3 and rakesh a 4 is reduced to the period already undergone by them. 