subject to section 46for a registered trade mark up to date within one month before the date of making application for rectification for a continuous period of 5 years or longer if registered trade mark had not been use during that period there was no bona fide user in relation to those goods by the proprietor thereof for the time being. a permitted use of the trade mark should be done under sub s 1 of section 48. it should be either by the registered proprietor of the trade mark or a person other than the registered proprietor registered u s 481 to use the trade mark by operation of sub section 2 an un registered person u s 481 or a person who did not register u s 1 of s 48 shall not be deemed to be a registered user for the purpose of s 46 or any other law. the high court recorded a finding and it is not disputed across the bar that the appellant had entered into an agreement with sen raleigh which was a permitted user and used the trade mark till november 11976 and thereafter by registered user agreement dated december 201976 used trade mark for a period of 5 years. it is not in dispute that till date of filing of the application the appellant used the trade mark in passing off the bicycles under the trade mark of the respondent. to get a trade mark registered without any intention to use it in relation to any goods but merely to make money out of it by selling it to others the right to use it as a commodity would be trafficking in that trade mark it requires to be prevented and prohibited. the court would not lend assistance to such registered proprietors of the trade mark. there must be real trade connection between the proprietor of the trade and licensee of the goods and the intention to use the trade mark must exist at the date of the application for registration of trade mark and such intention must be genuine and bona fide and continue to subsist in order to disprove the charge of trafficking in trade mark. it is a question of fact in every case. the question is whether the trade connection exists to dispel the charge of trafficking in the trade mark. though the deemed presumption under sub s 2 of s 48 is referable to the permitted user or the registered user and it does not extend to unregistered permitted user the connecting link of passing off the goods between the licensor 's trade mark and the lincesee should bona fide be with the permission or consent which may be express or implied by long course of dealings. it would connect the registered proprietor and the user of the trade mark by the unregistered lincesee. the appellant must be presumed by course of conduct that he is a bona fide user for the purpose of s 461b. the high court has properly exercised its discretion and refused to rectify and strike off the trade mark from the register of trade marks of the registrar. 