that neither the arbitral tribunal nor the high court have gone into the question whether the claim made by the respondent would otherwise fall within the ambit of the arbitration clause in the charter party or not. what is in dispute is whether the arbitration agreement between the parties had got extinguished after 31st august1998i e the date of expiry of the extended period of the charter party. it is no doubt true that the general rule is that an offer is not accepted by mere silence on the part of the offerree yet it does not mean that an acceptance always has to be given in so many words. under certain circumstances offerree s silence coupled with his conduct which takes the form of a positive act may constitute an acceptance an agreement sub silentio. therefore the terms of a contract between the parties can be proved not only by their words but also by their conduct. in our view the principle of sub silentio is clearly attracted in the present case. there was no response by the appellant to respondent s letter dated 4th january1999 though it appears that vide their letter of even date the appellant did suggest to the respondent that as a token of formal agreement the said letter may be jointly signed by the charterers and the vessel owners. admittedly no such agreement was signed between the parties. indubitably there was no further exchange of correspondence between the parties during the year. on a conjoint reading of the clauses it is plain that the appellant was under an obligation to re deliver the vessel as per the procedure contemplated in the afore noted clauses. indisputably the vessel in question had not been re delivered at least during the relevant period and the appellant continued to use the vessel beyond 31st august1998. having failed to re deliver the vessel in terms of cl 4 1 of the charter party the appellant can not plead that the charter party had been fully worked out. it is clear from the pleadings and issue no 2framed by the arbitral tribunal that it was respondent s consistent stand that since the hired vessel had not been re delivered at the end of the time charter party the vessel would be governed by the terms and conditions in the charter party dated 6th may1997. however the arbitral tribunal answered the said issue against the respondent. it appears to us that even the question in regard to the effect and consequences of non delivery of the vessel in terms of the cl 4 1 and 23 would by itself be a dispute arising under the said charter party with respect the learned arbitral tribunal overlooked this aspect of the matter. resultantly the appeal being devoid of any merit is liable to be dismissed which we do leaving the parties to bear their own costs. 