the core question which arises for our consideration is as to whether in the aforementioned facts and circumstances of the case the application under s 461b was maintainable. indisputably the scope of the provisions for removal from register in terms of s 46 and 56 of the act stand on different footings. whereas s 46 had a limited application s 56 of the act is wider in nature concededly cl a of sub s 1 of s 46 is not attracted in the case. the prayer in the application was to take off the registered trade mark from the register in respect of centrifugal pumps goods so far as the registration made in favour of the appellant is concerned. it is in the aforementioned situation it is advisable to determine the meaning of the words for the time being occurring in s 461b of the act. two interpretations thereto which are possible are 1 the said words would denote non use of the trade mark in relation to the goods by the appellant for a period of five years or longer and 2 the mark had not been used for a period of five years or longer either by the present proprietor thereof or his predecessor. the words for the time being would mean differently in different situations. it may mean the moment or existing position as was held by this court in the case of jivendra nath kaul vs collector district magistrate and anr 1992 3 scc 576 1992 indlaw sc 1107 or in the context of cl 22 of art 366 of the constitution as has been held in h h maharajadhiraja madhav rao jivaji rao scindia bahadur of gwalior h h maharajadhiraja maharana shri bhagwat singhji bahadur of udaipur vs union of india and anr air 1971 sc 530 1970 indlaw sc 300 para 88 to mean by the use of the expression for the time being in cl 22 of art 366 the president is not invested with authority to accord a temporary recognition to a ruler nor with authority to recognize or not to recognize a ruler arbitrarily the expression for them time being predicts that there shall be a ruler of the indian state that if the first recognized ruler dies or ceases to be a ruler a successor shall be appointed and that there shall not be more rulers than one at a given time. the person in whose name the trade mark has been registered may take action against any person for passing off the goods as that of the registered owner. it confers an exclusive right of use of the trade mark in relation to the goods in which the trade mark is registered. whether s 461b read with s 48 of the act would bring within its purview not only a registered proprietor but also the proprietor who had otherwise acquired a right would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. the court while construing a statute takes into consideration the parliamentary intent in amending the provisions thereof it seeks to enhance the period of moratorium of use of the registered trade mark from one month to three months so as to prevent speculative assignment. thus a case of speculative assignment is specifically required to be made out such an application may be maintainable in terms of s 56 of the act but strictly not in terms of s 461b thereof and that too in the absence of the original registered proprietor. attention has again been drawn to a passage from law of trade marks geographical indications by shri k c kailasam wherein the judgment of the tribunal has been criticized in the following terms from the above legislative intent it would seem that the period of non use of the trade mark is to be reckoned continuously from the date of its registration in the case of american home products corporation vs mac laboratories pvt ltd rendered under the 1958 act it was held by the supreme court that the person seeking to have the trade mark removed from the register has only to prove such continuous non user. it would appear that neither the u k act nor the indian act at any time envisaged that the commencement of 5 year period of non use is to be delinked from the date of registration of the mark so as to give a fresh lease of life to the registration every time there is change in the ownership of the mark. if that be so any registered proprietor could easily defeat an application for rectification by assigning the mark to some other person to have a fresh period of 5 years from the date of assignment and thus effectively frustrate the very object of the provision in s 471a and b. further it is to be noted that an assignment is subject to the provisions of the act and any rights vested in any other person see s 37. the assignor can not obviously transfer more rights than he himself has to the assignee under the act. an assigner can transfer only such right which he possesses. 