the writ petition was styled u art 227 of the constitution is of no consequence. it is the nature of the relief sought for and the controversy involved which determines the article which is applicable. a bare reading of the order shows that the direction was to consider the lpa on merits and time was granted to prefer the lpa within three weeks. the high court 's order is unsustainable. the high court seems to have gone by the nomenclature gone by the nomenclature i e the discription given in the writ petition to be one u art 227 of the constitution. the high court did not consider the nature of the controversy and the prayer involved in the writ petition. by art 226 the power of issuing prerogative writs possessed by the chartered high courts prior to the commencement of the constitution has been made wider and more extensive and conferred upon every high court. in umaji keshao meshram vs radhikabai air 1986 sc 1272 1986 indlaw sc 651 it was noted as follows u art 226 an order direction or writ is to issue to a person authority or the state. in a proceeding under that article the person authority or state against whom the direction order or writ is sought is a necessary party. under article 227however what comes up before the high court is the order or judgment of a subordinate court or tribunal for the purpose of ascertaining whether in giving such judgment or order that subordinate court or tribunal has acted within its authority and according to law. the nature of the exercise of the power under article 226however remains the same as in the case of the power of issuing prerogative writs possessed by the chartered high courts. it was open to the respondent to invoke the jurisdiction of the high court both u arts 226 and 227 of the constitution of india. once such a jurisdiction was invoked and when his writ petition was dismissed on merits it can not be said that the learned single judge had exercised his jurisdiction only u art 226 of the constitution of india. this conclusion directly flows from the relevant averments made in the writ petition and the nature of jurisdiction invoked by the respondent as noted by the learned single judge in his judgment as seen earlier. consequently it could not be said that cl 15 of the letters patent was not attracted for preferring appeal against the judgment of the learned single judge. it is also necessary to note that the appellant being the respondent in letters patent appeal joined issues on merits and did not take up the contention that the letters patent appeal was not maintainable. for all these reasons therefore the primary objection to the maintainability of the letters patent appeal as canvassed by learned counsel for the appellant has to be repelled. the high court was not justified in holding that the letters patent appeal was not maintainable. in addition a bare reading of this court 's earlier order shows that the impugned order is clearly erroneous. 