the starting point of the incident in question as indicated from the evidence on record is the hall where apparently a dispute started between the parties with regard to the electricity connection in the house. the deceased tried to put off the light of one particular room at which the appellant and other accused persons became annoyed and the appellant switched on the light which was again switched off by the deceased. at this the deceased became annoyed and the appellant removed the fuse of the electricity which act of his plunged the entire house into darkness. it is also clear and established that thereafter a lamp was brought by accused no 3 to the room besides another lamp which was already burning in the said room itself. but in any case there was an electricity light post in the front of the house which was giving enough light to the house. there is also evidence on record to show that even outsiders were watching the incident from the road which indicates that there was sufficient light for them to see what was happening in the house where the incident had taken place. there was indeed some scuffle between the parties during the course of which accused no 1 received simple injuries and the deceased died of the two stab injuries inflicted by the present appellant. the issue with regard to the initiation of the investigation without recording the fir was succinctly addressed by this court in the case of state of u p vs bhagwant kishore joshi 1964 3 scr 71 1963 indlaw sc 268 observed as follows 17 what is investigation is not defined in the code of criminal procedure but in h n rishbud and inder singh vs state of delhi 1954 indlaw sc 14 this court has described the procedure for investigation as follows thus under the code investigation consists generally of the following steps 1 proceeding to the spot 2 ascertainment of the facts and circumstances of the case 3 discovery and arrest of the suspected offender 4 collection of evidence relating to the commission of the offence which may consist of a the examination of various persons including the accused and the reduction of their statements into writing if the officer thinks fit b the search of places of seizure of things considered necessary for the investigation and to be produced at the trial and 5 formation of the opinion as to whether on the material collected there is a case to place the accused before a magistrate for trial and if so taking the necessary steps for the same by the filing of a charge sheet. in the instant case it is quite clear from the evidence on record that pw 1 received the information about the death of the deceased from psi of panaji police station without any detail as to how the incident had happened and who had caused the incident. it was a very cryptic information received by him regarding the death of a person residing within the jurisdiction of his police station pursuant to an incident taking place on 10 04 1988 between 8 30 p m to 8 45 p m and therefore it appears that there was not enough information available to him either to get a g d entry recorded or to get an fir lodged. in order to verify the information received pw 21 went to the place of occurrence and found the entire house in total darkness. the said eye witnesses are consistent about the principal act of the appellant in stabbing the deceased. the discrepancies which were sought to be pointed out are minor discrepancies without in any manner affecting the substratum of the prosecution case and therefore minor discrepancies in the evidence of the eye witnesses are immaterial. the postmortem report indicates that there were sixteen injuries as against the two as adduced in ocular evidence and therefore a submission was made by the counsel appearing for the appellant that the medical evidence adduced in the present case is not supporting the ocular evidence. the place of occurrence is a residence inhabited by both the parties and there is no evidence on record that the deceased was armed with any weapon. records clearly establish that there was indeed a scuffle between the parties with regard to the availability of electricity in a particular room and during the course of scuffle the appellant also received an injury which was simple in nature and that there was heated exchange of words and scuffle between the parties before the actual incident of stabbing took place. there is therefore provocation and the incident happened at the spur of the moment. that being the factual position we are of the considered view that the present case can not be said to be a case section but it is a case falling under section 304 part ii ipc. it is trite law that section 304 part ii comes into play when the death is caused by doing an act with knowledge that it is likely to cause death but there is no intention on the part of the accused either to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. 