whether the application is under section 46 or under section 56 or a composite application under both sections it is a pre requisite that the applicant must be a person aggrieved. section 461 of the 1958 act enables any person aggrieved to apply for removal of registered trade mark from the register on the ground of non use as stated in clause a andor clause b. to be an aggrieved person under section 46he must be one whose interest is affected in some possible way it must not be a fanciful suggestion of grievance. a likelihood of some injury or damage to the applicant by such trade mark remaining on the register may meet the test of locus standi. in kerly 's law of trade marks and trade names 11th edition at page 166the legal position with regard to person aggrieved has been summarized thus the persons who are aggrieved are all persons who are in some way or the other substantially interested in having the mark removed where it is a question of removal from the register including all persons who would be substantially damaged if the mark remained and all trade rivals over whom an advantage was gained by a trader who was getting the benefit of a registered trade mark to which he was not entitled. the court accept the above statement of law. sections 46 and 56 require person aggrieved to apply for removal of the registered trade mark from the register or rectification of a trade mark in the register the expression person aggrieved for the purposes of these two sections has different connotations. in hardie trading ltd 2003 indlaw sc 756 2003 11 scc 92this court stated that the phrase person aggrieved is a common enough statutory precondition for a valid complaint or appeal. the phrase has been variously construed depending on the context in which it occurs. three sections viz sections 4656 and 69 of the act contain the phrase. section 46 deals with the removal of a registered trade mark from the register on the ground of non use. this section presupposes that the registration which was validly made is liable to be taken off by subsequent non user. section 56 on the other hand deals with situations where the initial registration should not have been or was incorrectly made. but if the ground for rectification is merely based on non user i e under section 46 of the act that is not really on account of any public mischief by way of an incorrect entry. the non user does not by itself render the entry incorrect but it gives a right to a person whose interest is affected to apply for its removal. an applicant must therefore show that in some possible way he may be damaged or injured if the trade mark is allowed to stand. addisons application was one under section 46 and the test to determine whether the applicant was a person aggrieved within the meaning of that section should have been the one laid down by romer j in wright case and not the one propounded by the house of lords in the matter of powell 's trade mark. in a recent decision in the case of kabushiki kaisha toshiba 2008 10 scc 766 2008 indlaw sc 1395 this court stated that section 46 speaks for private interest while section 56 speaks of a public interest. in the first place when the first respondent applied for rectification removal in respect of three registrations in classes 79 and 16it must have shown in respect of each of them that it is a person aggrieved and the ipab must have separately considered in respect of each registration the locus standi of the first respondent as the considerations for each entry might not have been common. during the pendency of the applications certain events had taken place which had some bearing on the question of locus standi of the first respondent insofar as invocation of section 46 1 of the 1958 act is concerned. in terms of section 461not only that the applicant has to show that he is an aggrieved person as his interest is being affected but the ipab must also be satisfied before it directs the removal of registered trade mark that the applicant is an aggrieved person before it invokes the power in directing the removal of the 26 registered trade mark. this is so because the pre requisite for exercise of power under section 461 is that the applicant is a person aggrieved. in the circumstances the court was satisfied that the applications made by the first respondent for rectification removal of the subject trade marks from the register need to be considered afresh by the ipab in accordance with law and the observations made above. since the first respondent has also grievance in connection with the impugned order particularly with regard to non consideration of its case under section 56 of the 1958 act the court refrained from going into the merits of the diverse contentions raised before us and leave the parties to agitate these contentions before the ipab. 