in connection with land acquisition proceeding whenever the provision of s 17 and its various sub sections including s 174 is used in the name of taking urgent or emergent action and the right of hearing of the land holder under section 5a is dispensed with the court is called upon to consider a few fundamentals in the exercise of such powers. admittedly the land acquisition act a pre constitutional legislation of colonial vintage is a drastic law being expropriatory in nature as it confers on the state a power which affects person 's property right. even though right to property is no longer fundamental and was never a natural right and is acquired on a concession by the state it has to be accepted that without right to some property other rights become illusory. the meaning of public purpose in acquisition of land must be judged on the touchstone of this expanded view of part iii rights. the open ended nature of our constitution needs a harmonious reconciliation between various competing principles and the overhanging shadows of socio economic reality in this country. while examining these questions of public importance the courts especially the higher courts cannot afford to act as mere umpires. in other words public purpose must be viewed through the prism of constitutional values as stated above. the aforesaid principles in our jurisprudence compel this court to construe any expropriartory legislation like the land acquisition act very strictly. the judicial pronouncements on this aspect are numerous only a few of them may be noted here. in dlf qutab enclave complex educational charitable trust vs state of haryana and ors 2003 5 scc 622 2003 indlaw sc 124this court construed the statute on town planning law and held expropriatory statute as is well known must be strictly construed. the same principle has been reiterated subsequently by a three judge bench of this court in state of maharashtra and anr vs b e billimoria and ors 2003 7 scc 336 2003 indlaw sc 618 in the context of ceiling law. section 5a was not there in the land acquisition act1894 but the same was inserted long ago by the land acquisition amendment act1923 vide s 3 of act 38 of 1923. the question is whether in the admitted facts of this case invoking the urgency clause u s 17 4 is justified. in the writ petition before the high court the petitioners have given the details of the land holding and it has also been stated that the entire holding of petitioners 25791011 and 13 have been acquired and as a result of such acquisition the petitioners have become landless. the construction of jail is certainly in public interest and for such construction land may be acquired. but such acquisition can be made only by strictly following the mandate of the said act. in the facts of this case such acquisition can not be made by invoking emergency provisions of s 17. if so advised government can initiate acquisition proceeding by following the provision of section 5a of the act and in accordance with law. 