it is not in dispute that the company was under heavy arrears as on 3rd january1977. therefore the district collector meerut appointed the receiver. it is also not in dispute that labour and other dues were payable by the company apart from sale tax dues and the loan was given by the state government between 1977 1984 for payment of such dues. the order dated 20th february1992 passed by the collector was also not under challenge inspite of the same the high court declared the order dated 20th february1992 as illegal. the parties only on the limited question as to why the amount which has been directed to be refunded to the auction purchasers appellants herein should not bear reasonable interest. in a situation like in the present case one can not hold of any statute entitling the auction purchasers to claim interest in case the auction got cancelled or set aside by the court of law. counsel for the parties also could not refer any of the clauses of auction prescribing interest on refund of amount in case of cancellation of auction or sale. the question arises as to whether in such a situation an auction purchaser can claim interest on equitable ground. in state of maharashtra and others vs maimuma banu and others2003 7 scc 448 2003 indlaw sc 625the question arose as to whether interest was payable on rental compensation. in the present case there was no mis representation on the part of the auction purchasers they deposited the total auction amount within the time stipulated. it has not been in dispute that the title of the land was also transferred in their favour. but for the reasons mentioned by the high court the sale has been cancelled. it has been ordered to refund amount in favour of the auction purchaser appellants. there is no reason as to why on equitable grounds the appellants should not get interest on the said amount. taking into consideration the aforesaid factor while working out equities it would therefore be appropriate to direct the state to pay interest at the rate of 6 on the amount to be refunded as per the high court 's order with effect from 27th april2001 and 3rd september2001the day the high court passed the impugned order. 