pws 5 6 have clearly spoken about the overt act of the accused that a 1 jage ram attacked and caused injury to pw 5 jagdish with jaily blows and that second accused rajbir. raju attacked on the head of sukhbir with pharsi. they have also stated that madan and rakesh caused injuries to pw5 jagdish with lathi on shoulder and left elbow respectively. pw 2 dr pardeep kumar in his evidence stated that he has examined pws 5 and 6 and noted the injuries on the body of pws 5 and 6 and issued wound certificates. evidence of pws 5 and 6 is amply corroborated by medical evidence. pws 5 and 6 being injured witnesses their evidence is entitled to great weight. cogent and convincing grounds are required to discard the evidence of injured witnesses. in the light of the fact that pws 5 and 6 were injured witnesses courts below tested their evidence for its credibility and recorded concurrent findings that pws 5 and 6 are trustworthy witnesses. for the purpose of conviction section 307 ipc prosecution has to establish i the intention to commit murder and ii the act done by the accused. to justify a conviction section 307 ipc it is not essential that fatal injury capable of causing death should have been caused. in the case of state of m p vs kashiram ors air 2009 sc 1642 2009 4 scc 26 2009 indlaw sc 92 the scope of intention for attracting conviction section 307 ipc was elaborated and it was held as under. it is sufficient to justify a conviction section 307 if there is present an intent coupled with some overt act in execution thereof. it is not essential that bodily injury capable of causing death should have been inflicted. the conviction of the second appellant rajbir 307 ipc is unassailable. for the conviction section 307 ipc courts below imposed upon the 2nd appellant rigorous imprisonment of five years while imposing punishment courts have an obligation to award appropriate punishment. in the heat of passion the accused have caused injuries to the complainant party. having regard to the fact that the occurrence was of the year 1994 considering the other facts and circumstances of the case the sentence of imprisonment imposed on jage ram a 1 madan a 3 and rakesh a 4 is reduced to the period already undergone by them. 