lakshminarayana iyer a hindu brahmin in the tirunelveli district died leaving him a surviving widow ranganayaki and a married daughter ramalakshmi. ramalakshmi had married the plaintiff and had a number of children from him. they were all alive in december 1924 when lakshminarayana died. by this will he gave the following directions “ after my lifetime you the aforesaid ranganayaki amminal my wife shall till your lifetime enjoy the aforesaid entire properties enjoy the aforesaid entire properties the outstandings due to me the debts payable by me and the chit amounts payable by me after your lifetime ramalakshmi ammal our daughter and wife of rama ayyar avergal of melagaram village and her heirs shall enjoy them with absolute rights and powers of alienation such as gift exchange and sale from son to grandson and so on for generations as regards the payment of maintenance to be made to chinnanmal alias lakshmi ammal wife of my late son hariharamayyan my wife ranganayaki ammal shall pay the same as she pleases and obtain a release deed. ranganayaki entered into possession of the properties on the death of her husband. she settled the maintenance claim of lakshmi ammal and obtained a deed of release from her. ramalakshmi died during the lifetime of the widow. the widow describing herself as an absolute owner of the properties of her husband sold one of the items of the property to the 2nd defendant. on the 18th september 1945 the suit out of which this appeal arises was instituted by the plaintiff the husband and the sole heir of ramalakshmi for a declaration that the said sale would not be binding on him beyond the lifetime of the widow. a prayer was made that the widow be restrained from alienating the other properties in her possession. an ad interim injunction was issued by the high court restraining the widow from alienating the properties in her possession and forming part of her husband 's estate. inspite of this injunction she executed two deeds of settlement in favour of the other defendants comprising a number of properties. the main issue in the suit was whether the widow took under the will an absolute estate or an estate like the hindu widow 's estate and whether the daughter 's interest therein was in the nature of a contingent remainder or whether she got in the properties a vested interest. 