this appeal with special leave is directed against the judgment and order of the labour appellate tribunal of india in a dispute regarding the workers claim for bonus. during 1948 the appellant made a profit of rs 1197648 11 9. it paid 24 3 per cent dividend on ordinary shares being the maximum that could be paid under the public companies limitation of dividend ordinance of 1948 and also paid to the workers their full share of bonus at annas 4 in a rupee of their basic earnings. during 1949 the selling rates for cloth and yarn were controlled by the government and were approximately 4 per cent below those obtained in 1948. the basic wages were increased from the 1st december 1948 by order of the government of uttar pradesh and the total wages paid were therefore higher than those in the previous year. there was moreover indiscipline amongst the workers and production suffered. there was a strike in october and the mills were closed for nearly a month. further the management were unable to secure cotton which resulted in the curtailment of the working hours. as a result of all these circumstances the appellant suffered a huge trading loss. the appellant also paid ex gratia to the workmen bonus at the rate of annas 2 per rupee of their basic earnings making it clear by their notification 7th april 1950 that the directors had sanctioned the payment at that rate in spite of the appellant having suffered a trading loss for the year that it was being paid entirely at the discretion of the appellant and was not related to or connected with any contract of employment of any worker. the secretary of the respondent union petitioned to the provincial conciliation officer textile that there was more production in 1949 than in 1948 that there was no reason to hold that the profit in 1949 was less than in the previous year and that the rate of bonus was wrongly reduced and asked that bonus for 1949 should also be paid at the rate of annas 4 per rupee. the industrial dispute which thus arose was referred for enquiry and recording of an award to the regional conciliation board textile kanpur. the conciliation board by a majority decision repelled the contention of the appellant and awarded the payment of bonus at annas 4 per rupee. on an appeal taken by the appellant to the industrial court textiles and hosiery kanpur the industrial court accepted the contention of the appellant allowed the appeal and set aside the award. the respondent thereupon appealed to the labour appellate tribunal which substantially agreed with the industrial court on questions of fact as well as the general position in law but imported considerations of social justice and treating this as a special case where social justice would demand that labour should have bonus for the year where for that very year capital had not only a reasonable return but much in excess of that allowed the appeal and directed the appellant to pay to the workmen bonus. the appellant filed this appeal against that decision after obtaining special leave from this court. 