in 1929 the andhra engineering co aeco which was originally a partnership firm formed by one d l n raju was converted into a private limited company with its headquarters at visakhapatnam. it obtained licences from the government under the electricity act for supply of electrical energy to visakhapatnam anakapalli and some other places. as the aeco did not have the necessary capital to undertake the work raju floated in 1933 a public limited company called visakhapatnam electric supply corporation ltd and another in 1936 called the anakapalli electric supply corporation ltd. the aeco transferred its licences for the supply of electrical energy to the consumers of visakhapatnam to vesco and similarly transferred to aeco the licence to supply electrical energy to consumers at anakapalli. the aeco was appointed managing agent for each of these corporations under separate agreements sometime later other industrial concerns the andhra cements ltd vijayawada and the east coast ceremics rajahmurthy were started apparently by raju himself and the aeco was appointed the managing agent of each of these concerns. the original managing agency agreement in favour of aeco with respect to vesco was for a period of 15 years i e from 1933 to 1948 and was later renewed for the remaining term of the currency of the licence granted by the government under the electricity act. a mention may be made of the fact that in june 1952 the vesco undertaking was acquired by the government under the provisions of the electricity undertaking acquisition act but nothing turns on it. the vesco had its own board of directors while the aeco had also its own separate board of directors. the vesco had no managing director but at each meeting of its board of directors one of the directors used to be elected chairman. the same practice was followed at the meeting of the general body of the shareholders. the aeco on the other hand always had a managing director first of whom was d l n raju. he died in the year 1939 and was succeeded by r k n g raju an advocate of rajahmundry. this person however did not shift to visakhapatnam on his becoming the managing director but continued to stay most of the time at rajahmundry. the aeco as managing agents of vesco had appointed in 1939 one d v appala raju a trusted employee as its representative and as the secretary of vesco. in 1944 this person resigned from his appointments and started his own business in radio and electrical goods in the name of d brothers. he was succeeded by t visweswara rao an employee of the aeco. eventually their choice fell on g vs subba raju resident of manchili who held a large number of shares in the aeco and who was besides related to r k n g raju by marriage. it is said that this person has not received much education and knows only how to sign his name in english. he was assured that by consenting to become the managing director be would not be required to discharge onerous duties and that the respondent no i would look to all the affairs of vesco. he was also told that apart from signing important papers which may be sent to him by the respondent no 1 from time to time to manchili or wherever be might be would have no work to do. he agreed and was elected managing director of aeco in the middle of 1948 upon this understanding he accepted the position offered to him. the vesco used to receive large amounts of money from high tension power consumers such as the railways k g hospital the port administration the andhra university etc by cheques. but domestic consumers usually paid their bills in cash to the bill collectors who used to hand over their collections to the respondent no 2. the respondent no 2 was asked by the respondent no i to maintain a private note book. in that book payments which used to be made by respondent no 2 on the basis of slips issued by the respondent no i used to be noted and the amount totalled up at the end of the day. this amount was posted in vesco 's cash handover book as by safe indicating that this amount was kept in the safe though in fact it was not. on the basis of the entries in the handover book the final accounts were written up. the respondent no i opened four personal accounts in different banks including the imperial bank of india. when the respondent no i had to issue a personal cheque on any of these banks he used to ask the second respondent to send an equivalent amount to the bank concerned for being credited to his account. these amounts also used to be noted in the private note book and entered. another thing which the respondent no i initiated was opening a heading in the ledger called advance purchase of materials. amounts which had been misappropriated used to be posted therein though in fact no orders were placed for any material. it may be mentioned that subba raju used to visit visakhapatnam twice a month and check up the account books. at that time it used to be represented to him that the amounts which were shown to be in the safe and not found therein had been sent to the bank for being deposited. apparently subba raju was fully satisfied with this and other explanations and therefore he appointed one c section raju who was the manager of andhra cements to supervise over the affairs of vesco. apparently because of this a new method of misappropriation was adopted by the respondents by starting in the vesco account books an account called suspense account. a lakh of rupees passed through that account. amounts which were misappropriated used to find their way in this account. a new cash book was also said to have been prepared by the conspirators with the object of covering up the misappropriations which had been made. subba raju was not satisfied with the nature of supervision exercised by c section raju over the affairs of vesco because he used to look only at the cash book entries of the days on which he paid visits to vesco 's office to which he used to go with previous intimation. besides that c section raju 's management of andhra cements had landed it into a loss of rs 30 000 . because of all these things he had c section raju replaced towards the end of 1951 by one subbaramayya a retired finance officer from the madras electricity board both as a director of andhra cements and as a supervisor over the accounts of vesco. subbaramayya took his work seriously and called for information on a number of points from the respondent no 1. he however was unable to obtain any information. in january 1952 he therefore brought one section g krishna aiyar who had vast experience in the maintenance of accounts of electrical undertaking 's having been chief accountant of the south madras electric supply corporation to undertake an investigation and then to act as financial adviser. krishna aiyar after his appointment made close enquiry and submitted an interim report. that report showed that during the period 1948 49 rs 33 271 10 0 shown as paid to the andhra power system were in fact not paid. the respondent no 1 on being asked to explain said that he would give his explanation to the managing director. the interim report showed that there was a shortage of about rs 90 000 for this period. on february 12 1952 the respondent no i wrote to the managing director admitting his responsibility and agreed to make good the amounts found short or such other amounts as would be found short up to the end of march 1952 further scrutiny of the accounts was being carried out by krishna aiyar and in his subsequent report he pointed out that rs 2 38 000 which were shown as having been paid to the andhra power system had actually not been paid. in fact in april 1952 the collector attached vesco properties for realising this amount. on april 30 1952 the respondent no 1 by selling some of his property himself paid rs 50 000 to the andhra power system towards the sum due to it from vesco and had promised to pay the balance shortly thereafter. he was given time for doing so but he failed to pay it. the directors of vesco thereafter authorised k section dutt one of the directors to lodge a complaint with the police which he accordingly lodged on may 19 1952. on the next day the police placed an armed guard around the office of the respondent no i and seized a number of papers. as a result of investigation they found that there was a total misappropriation of rs 3 40 000. on may 13 1954 a chargesheet was filed against the two respondents as well as murti and the approver ramana. on september 13 1954 ramana offered to make a full confession to the additional district magistrate independent who was empowered to grant pardon under section 337 of the code of criminal procedure. he however directed ramana to make his confession before a submagistrate. the latter accordingly made a confession on november 15 1954 and on november 17 1954 the additional district magistrate granted him pardon and that is how he came to be examined as a witness in this case. the additional sessions judge convicted both the respondents the respondent no i in respect of each head of the offences with which he was charged and the respondent no 2 in respect only of the offences of conspiracy and misappropriation. in the first place according to the high court joint trial of two or more persons in respect of different offences committed by each of them is illegal and that here as they were charged with having committed offences under section 120 b section 409 section 477 a and section 476467 i p c they could not be tried jointly. 