the respondent is a woman worker employed in mount stuart estate the establishmentwhich is carrying on plantation industry was allowed leave of absence by the establishment on the basis of a notice given by her of her expected delivery. after her delivery the respondent was paid by her employers on account of maternity benefit an amount equivalent to what she would have earned on the basis of her average daily wage in 72 working days falling within twelve week 's of the maternity period. while calculating the aforesaid amount of maternity benefit the establishment admittedly excluded twelve sundays being wageless holidays which fell during the period of the respondent 's actual absence immediately preceding and including the day of her delivery and the six weeks immediately following that day. dissatisfied with this computation the respondent made a representation to her employers claiming maternity benefit for the entire period of twelve weeks under the act i e for 84 days on the plea that a week consisted of seven days. as her demand did not evoke a favourable response the respondent applied to the labour court coimbatore u s 33c2 of the industrial disputes act for redress of her grievance. the claim preferred by the respondent was resisted by the appellant herein who contended that the respondent was admittedly working and was being paid only for six days in a week and that a pregnant woman worker is entitled to maternity benefit for 72 days which are the normal working days in twelve weeks and not for 84 days as no wage is payable for the seventh day of the week i e sunday which is a nonworking wageless holiday. the labour court allowed the claim of the respondent. thereupon the establishment moved the high court at madras u art 226 of the constitution challenging the decision of the labour court contending that the claim made by the respondent was untenable as normally a worker works only for six days in a week and the maternity benefit had to be computed only for 72 days. as against this the respondent pleaded that the computation had to be made not with reference to the actual number of working days but with reference to total number of days covered by twelve weeks i e 84 days. the high court allowed the petition holding that twelve weeks for which maternity benefit is provided for in subs 3 of s 5 of the act must be taken to mean twelve weeks of work and the computation of the benefit had to be made with reference to the actual days on which the woman would have worked but for her inability. aggrieved by this decision the respondent filed an appeal to this court. 