by hajur order the respondent was granted daljitgarh jagir comprising of 10 villages by the then ruler of idar by another hajur order the respondent was given a further grant in jivarak of 3 villages by yet another hajur order villages were granted in jivarak to the respondent by the ruler of idar in substitution of the villages mentioned in the previous two orders. according to the respondent by these grants read together he was given full proprietary rights in the soil of the said villages. admittedly on the coming into force of the bombay merged territories and areas jagirs abolition act1953 hereinafter referred to as the act i e with effect from respondent 's daljitgarh jagir stood abolished and all his rights in the jagir villages save as expressly provided by or under the act were extinguished and the respondent became entitled to compensation under s 11 of the act. according to the respondent since the entries made in the revenue records in respect of his rights to mines and mineral products were not sufficient and proper he by his application requested the collector to issue necessary orders to the idar to make appropriate entries regarding his rights in the minerals in village isarwada. thereupon a notice under s 372 of the bombay land revenue code for the purpose of holding an inquiry into the rights of the respondent to mines and mineral products of the said villages claimed by the respondent wag served upon him but the respondent raised a preliminary objection that such inquiry wag misconceived and incompetent in view of the determination made under s 2 4 i of the act and having regard to the provisions of s 10 of the act his rights to mines and mineral products were expressly saved. the collector overruled the preliminary objection and directed that the inquiry shall proceed and the respondent was directed to produce his evidence in support of his claim on a fixed date. aggrieved by this order passed by the collector the respondent preferred a writ petition under art 227 of the constitution to the gujarat high court and writ of certiorari quashing the order and a direction restraining the collector from further proceeding with the inquiry under s 372 of the land revenue code were sought. these reliefs sought by the respondent were resisted by the state of gujarat and the collector principally on the ground that the inquiry under s 372 of the land revenue code into the rights to mines and mineral products in the said villages claimed by the respondent was necessary and proper and could not be said to be concluded by the determination made under s 2 4 1 of the act by the competent authority. the high court set aside the collector 's order and further issued an injunction permanently restraining the state of gujarat and the collector from initiating any inquiry. the appellants seek to challenge the said judgment and order of the gujarat high court in this appeal. 