for admission in the last academic session 1993 94an interim order in the following terms was made by a bench comprising honourable the chief justice and one of us justice b p jeevan reddy on may 141993 in writ petition. there will be an interim order in the following terms. i fifty per cent of the total intake in the petitioners educational institutions shall be permitted to be filled up by candidates selected by the agencies of the state government on the basis of a competitive examination test. the candidates so selected and admitted shall pay scales of fee as applicable to this class of students as determined by the state government from time to time. ii the remaining fifty per cent of the intake may be regulated by the petitioners to admit candidates belonging to the particular religious or linguistic minority. however the selection shall be made strictly on the basis of merit among the candidates seeking admission to the institutions. such merit shall be determined on the basis of the academic performance at the qualifying examination or on the basis of any objective test that the institution might itself apply to determine such relative and competing merits or on the basis of performance of the results of the selection tests that the state government may itself hold for selecting candidates for admission to technical colleges in the state. it is optional for the petitioners to adopt any one of these three modes and apply it uniformally. candidates so selected on the basis of merit amongst the minorities shall however abide by such condition in the matter of payment of tuition and other fee as may be permitted by the state government. thereafter the matter was considered by the constitution bench. in that order the writ petitions placed before the bench were categorised into five categories namely1 unaided minority educational institutions2 minority educational institutions which are in receipt of state funds by way of aid3 minority educational institutions in respect of which it is not clear from the averments in the writ petitions whether they are aided or unaided institutions4 writ petitions challenging the correctness and applicability of unni krishnan filed by educational institutions which do not claim to be minority educational institutions5 writ petitions which do not fall in any of the above categories. it was directed that the order dated may 141993would not apply to educational institutions falling in categories 4 and 5 and the institutions referred to in paragraph 18 of the order dated august 181993. the 50 seats to be filled up by candidates selected by the agencies of the state government on the basis of a competitive examination test as well as the remaining 50 seats to be filled in accordance with cl of the said order shall be equally distributed between free seats and payment seats. in other words out of the 50 seats to be filled up by government half will be payment seats and half will be free seats similarly out of the 50 of the seats to be filled up by the management in accordance of the said order half shall be payment seats and the other half free seats. the nris if any admitted to an extent not exceeding 5 of the total seats shall be out of the payment seats to be filled under after completing the admissions each of the colleges shall submit to the competent authority to the university to which it is affiliated and to the government concerned statements containing full particulars of the students admitted. 