the respondents are the members of one sarkar family in the city of calcutta. the dispute centres around a fishery called nalban fishery. a suit for partition was filed by one of the co sharers of said sarkar family in the high court of calcutta. the schedule of properties included the disputed nalban fishery. a learned single judge of the calcutta high court passed a preliminary decree in the said suit. one of the co sharers of the sarkar family preferred an appeal against the preliminary decree before the division bench. during the pendency of the aforesaid appeal the state of west bengal requisitioned large extent of fisheries including the disputed nalban fishery in exercise of power under section 31 of the west bengal land requisition and acquisition act of 1948. members of the sarkar family challenged the order of requisition by filing a writ petition in calcutta high court which was was dismissed by the learned single judge. sc had directed that the state of west bengal will be made a party to the proceeding and further the collector parganas was appointed as receiver in respect of the fisheries owned by the sarkar family. the court had also further directed that the collector will be the receiver in respect of the fisheries which has not already been vested in the state and whose possession has not already been taken over by the state. pursuant to the aforesaid order appointing collector 24 parganas as receiver the collector 24 parganas took possession of the fisheries including nalban fishery as receiver and submitted a compliance report to the registrar of this court. it may be noted that nalban fishery had been requisitioned by the state of west bengal under the provisions of requisition act and possession thereof had been taken and the sarkar family had challenged the said order unsuccessfully which final by the dismissal of the special leave petition by this court. the collector 24 parganas who had been appointed as receiver realised that he could not have taken possession of nalban fishery as receiver since the said fishery had already been in possession of the state of west bengal pursuant to requisition order. the receiver therefore intimated to the registrar of this court the mistake committed by him in his earlier report and expressed apology to this court for the mistake committed in the earlier report. while the matter stood thus in relation to the aforesaid nalban fishery the government of west bengal handed over the possession of the said nalban fishery to the director of inland fisheries state fisheries development corporation for undertaking fisheries development scheme. the aforesaid corporation issued an advertisement for auctioning the nalban fishery for a boating complex. the sarkar family thereupon filed an application before the calcutta high court contending inter alia that under the decree passed in the partition suit by the supreme court the property belongs to the sarkar family and could not have been handed over to the state of west bengal. that application was disposed of by the learned single called upon the collector 24 parganas who was the receiver pursuance to the orders of the supreme court to take over the possession of nalban fishery from the state of west bengal and give vacant possession of the same to the sarkar family. 