kumari s a young child aged about 5 years was last seen at about 4 p m on 18th march 1991 and thereafter she did not return home at about 7 a m on 19th march 1991 kishori lal pw4 informed bd pw2 the unfortunate father of s that dead body of a girl was lying near mohalla basera on the outskirts of village kotputli. the dead body was sent for post mortem examination which was performed at 9 30 a m on the same day by a medical board of three doctors. it was found that the victim was brutally ravished and thereafter killed. according to the medical opinion the probable cause of death of s was shock produced due to vaginal trauma and rupture of post fornix along with asphyxia due to ligature around the neck. the forensic science laboratory confirmed presence of group b blood on the clothes of deceased. the clothes of the accused recovered were sent to forensic science laboratory according to report human semen was detected on underwear and human blood of group b was detected on the underwear. the accused was arrested on 3 4 1991 on suspicion. on 4 4 1991 he was medically examined. there was no injury on his private parts or on any other part of body. the clothes on his person did not have any blood or seminal stains. he was a grown up male of 21 years and capable of performing sexual intercourse. on 5 4 1991 he gave an information exbt p23 and in confirmation of the information led the police to a dry well wherefrom an underwear and baniyan wrapped in a newspaper dated 18 3 1991 were recovered. the clothes so recovered were sent to forensic science laboratory. according to report exbt p27 human semen was detected on underwear. according to report exbt p30 of forensic science laboratory human blood of group b was detected on the underwear. the accused appellant has been held guilty of offences punishable under section 302 and section 3762f of indian penal code. while the learned additional sessions judge made a reference to the high court for confirmation of death sentence under section 366 cr p c the appellant preferred an appeal putting in issue his conviction and sentence. 