the appellant m s bharat petroleum corporation limited is a government of india undertaking under the administrative control of the ministry of petroleum natural gas and is engaged in refining distributing and selling of petroleum products all over the country. the respondent m s great eastern shipping company limited is engaged in the business of shipping and allied activities and owns a fleet of tanker vessels for charter including the vessel known as jag praja. an agreement called the time charter party in legal parlance was entered into between the appellant and the respondent on 6th may1997 for letting on hire vessels for a period of two years from 22nd september1996 to 30th june1997 and from 1st july1997 to 30th june1998on the terms and conditions set out in the said agreement. however before the charter party was to come to an end on 29th june1998the indian oil corporation limited for short ioc acting as agent of the appellant issued a fax to various ship owners including the respondent herein requesting them to extend the validity of the charter party agreement dated 6th may1997 beyond 30th june1998 for a period of one month from 1st july1998 with option for two further extensions of 15 days each. the respondent agreed to the said proposal accordingly an addendum was signed between the parties whereby the validity period of charter party was extended for one month with an option for two further extensions for a period of 15 days each. the parties are ad idem that the charter party was extended till 31st august1998. it appears that since charter party dated 6th may1997 was coming to an end on 31st august1998the oil companies sought permission of the oil co ordination committee a wing of the ministry of petroleum and natural gas for further extension of the charter party. however the oil coordination committee by their fax message declined the request of the oil companies including the appellant for further extension of charter party beyond 31st august1998. thereafter in september1998the ioc for and on behalf of the oil industry floated a fresh tender for carriage of petroleum products along the indian coast on time charter basis for a period of one year on the terms and conditions set out in the tender document. in response to the said tender the respondent and other vessel owners submitted their bids. being aggrieved of the decision of the ioc to invite revised price bids after opening of the sealed tenders one of the bidders filed a writ petition in the bombay high court questioning the said decision. 