ujjagar singh the appellant herein was tried and convicted by the additional sessions judge sangrur for the murder of his niece mukhtiar kaur and was awarded the death penalty. in addition he was convicted for an offence punishable section 376 of the ipc and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and to a fine of rs 5 000 and in default of payment to undergo further r i for one year and section 309 of the ipc to a sentence of simple imprisonment for one year. the aforesaid convictions and sentences have been maintained by the high court and the matter is before us in these proceedings by way of special leave. at about 2 00 p m on 10th november 2002 a boy whose identity is not forthcoming informed satnam singh that an incident of firing had taken place in the house of ujjagar singh. satnam singh conveyed this information to sarpanch jora singh pw1 who was attending a marriage at that time. jora singh accompanied by gurdeep singh pw3 thereupon rushed to ujjagar singh 's house and found mukhtiar kaur lying dead with a gun shot injury and the appellant also with a gun shot injury lying unconscious on the ground in the adjoining room. it appears that mukhtiar kaur 's relations with her in laws had got strained and she had left her matrimonial home and come to live with ujjagar singh her uncle 7 or 8 months earlier and the suggestion was that mukhtiar kaur had been killed by the appellant with his licensed gun and he had thereafter attempted to commit suicide. after completion of the investigation at the spot mukhtiar kaur 's dead body was sent for its post mortem examination. it was found that mukhtiar kaur had two gunshot injuries on her dead body a wound of entry on the back of right side of chest 2 cm x 1 cm with margining and blackening and a corresponding exit wound of 5 cm x 3 5 cm to the front of the right side of the chest. semen was found on the swab taken from the vagina and from the underwear that mukhtiar kaur had been wearing at the time of her death. the weapon and the recovered cartridge cases had also been sent to the forensic science laboratory which in its report opined that the crime cartridge case ci could have been fired by the right barrel of the weapon whereas the crime cartridge case c2 had been fired from the right barrel. the statement of the accused was recorded section 313 of the cr p c. 