on 19 04 1988satish narayan sawant the appellant accused no 1 along with two other accused persons and also with two delinquent children allegedly formed an unlawful assembly and that in furtherance of the said common object stabbed one rauji dulba sawant the deceased and also assaulted baby dulba sawant pw 1 ashok dulba sawant pw 2 kunda rauji sawant pw 8 and laxmi dulba sawant pw 18 who are the sister brother wife and mother respectively of the deceased. it is also the case of the prosecution that as a result of the aforesaid stab injuries given to the deceased he expired on the same day i e on 19 04 1988 p s joaquim dias pw 21 who was attached to the ponda police station as p s i received a phone call at about 10 45 p m from p s i k k desai of the panaji police station that a person named rauji dulba sawant had been brought in police jeep by police constable jaisingrao rane and that while he was being taken to the goa medical college he expired. he was informed that the deceased had died as a result of stab injuries received and therefore he was to take necessary steps. on receipt of the aforesaid message pw 21 along with asi tabit mamlekar went to the scene of offence. they reached the scene of offence at about 11 30 p m but found the entire place plunged into darkness and with the help of torch light pw 21 surveyed the scene of offence. pw 21 noticed some blood stains in the front courtyard of the house and a pipe of length of about 1 foot or slightly less lying in the courtyard having blood stains. two juvenile girls named sarita and sharmila who are the sisters of the appellant were found in the house. in the meantime pw 1 pw 2 and pw 8 came to the house from whom pw 21 made certain inquiries and brought them along with accused no 3 and her two juvenile girls to the police station. not finding the appellant and accused no 2 in the house dy s p shri raikar and p i shri alan osa were sent in their search. after reaching the police station a complaint which is marked as exhibit pw 1 a was lodged by pw 1 in which it was alleged that pw 1 pw 8 pw 18 the deceased rauji and his brother narayan were residing in one house in banastari and they used to share a common kitchen between them. it was further alleged by pw 1 that two or three days before the ganesh festival deceased rauji had informed narayan that he would install statue of lord ganesh in the house and accordingly he had purchased the same. religious ceremony was performed by installing the statue of lord ganesh in the house and while the said religious ceremony was being performed accused no 2 started uttering insults while standing in the kitchen. accused no 3 told the appellant not to do anything in the ceremony and insulted the family members of rauji. pw 1 also alleged that on 19 04 1988 the deceased rauji returned from his duty at about 6 30 p m and thereafter went to purchase some articles on his return he went to take bath and after having bath he went and switched off the light of the room. as soon as the deceased switched off the light the appellant came from the room and started abusing rauji. there was a heated exchange of words between rauji and the appellant switched on the light which was again switched off by rauji the deceased. thereupon the appellant went and removed the fuse of the said light accused no 3 had then lit a kerosene lamp and brought the same in the hall. there was already an oil lamp burning which was attached to the ceiling by a brass chain. the appellant and the two other alleged accused namely accused nos 2 and 3 and the two juvenile offenders gathered in the hall to assault rauji the deceased pw 1 and pw 8. according to pw 1 in order to avoid the assault by all of them they went to bulcao balcony. when they went there the appellant went to his mother 's room and brought a knife with which he stabbed rauji. at that time all the accused persons were in the balcony. it was also alleged that after the deceased rauji fell down on the ground accused no 3 kicked him. at that time the appellant who was holding the knife in his hand handed over the same to accused no 3 by which she assaulted pw 8 but pw 8 caught the knife in her hand which caused injury to her right palm. thereafter according to pw 1 accused no 3 handed back the knife to the appellant and accused no 2 brought the oil lamp which was hung in the room and hit the oil lamp on the head of rauji the deceased. it was also alleged that when pw 8 tried to intervene the other three accused started assaulting her with fists and slaps. at that time pw 2 came there and questioned the accused persons as to what they were doing whereupon the appellant and accused no 2 started assaulting pw 2 also. then accused no 3 told the appellant and accused no 2 to finish off rauji first pw 8 pw 18 and pw 1 then lifted rauji and brought him in the courtyard. the residents of the locality had gathered in the courtyard and told the accused persons not to assault rauji. the juvenile offender sarita went inside the house and brought out one iron pipe which she handed over to the appellant who then hit the said pipe on the right leg of pw 1 and also gave a blow with the said pipe on rauji 's right hand. it was also alleged that the other juvenile offender sharmila brought a cement block shaped like an elephant trunk which she handed over to accused no 3 with which accused no 3 started assaulting rauji pw 1 however intervened and removed the said piece of cement block from the hand of accused no 3 but accused no 3 then picked up one stone and tried to throw it on rauji by saying that she was going to kill him with that stone. however pw 1 again intervened and removed the said stone from the hand of accused no 3 pw 18 rushed to the rescue of deceased rauji. the accused then started assaulting her and pw 8 with slaps. in the meantime police jeep arrived at the scene and on seeing the police jeep all the accused ran away from the courtyard and went inside pw 1 and others asked the police to take rauji to the hospital whereupon the police took him to the hospital in the police jeep along with pw 1 pw 2 and pw 8. on the basis of complaint made by pw 1 an fir was registered and the accused came to be arrested. on completion of the investigation the police submitted the charge sheet against the accused persons namely the present appellant accused no 1 accused nos 2 and 3 and the two juvenile offenders namely sarita and sharmila. the trial court framed charges against all the accused persons for the offence under sections 302 323 143 147 and 149 of the ipc. the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. 