an fir was registered on 23 3 1996 on the statement of one prakashi devi. she stated that on the night of 2223 3 1996while she and her daughter in law sheela devi were sleeping in her house around 11 30 pm the appellant jumped over the front wall of her house and broke the bulbs and ran away that at that time no male member was present in the house except the children that around 00 30 am the appellant again came into her house and touched her daughter in law sheela devi who woke up and raised an alarm and that the appellant immediately ran away. the police investigated into the said complaint and submitted a report u s 173 of the code of criminal procedure for short the code. on that basis the following charge was framed by the judicial magistrate first class karnal against the appellant. when the said charged was read over and explained to the appellant he pleaded not guilty to the said charge and claimed trial. prakashi devi was examined as pw 1. in her cross examination prakashi devi stated that she has five sons that only her husband and one son named mahavir were staying with her that the other four sons were married and were not staying with her that on that night her husband was away in the fields and her son mahavir was also not present in the house. however when confronted with her statement recorded in the fir she admitted having stated that when the appellant had come first time at around 11 30 pm and broke the outside bulbs her son woke up and went out of the house. she also admitted that the appellant did not touch her nor teased her nor abused her. her daughter in law sheela devi gave evidence as pw 2 and stated that she was married to one jaibir who worked in the military services that at 11 to 11 30 pm the accused scaled the door and broke the bulbs in the verandah of her house that when she identified the accused and raised an alarm the accused ran away that again he came around 00 30 am by scaling the door and caught her hand and that when she raised an alarm and when her mother in law woke up he ran away. the accused examined a witness ex sarpanch of the village as dw 1 and he stated that there was a quarrel between the accused and complainant 's son surinder about a water course and subsequently he came to know that the quarrel was converted into a false case against the accused by registering a false allegation that the accused had outraged the modesty of a woman. 