the appellants challenge the acquisition of their agricultural lands by the state of uttar pradesh for the construction of the district jail of shahjahanpur. the appellants themselves are bhumidar with transferable rights and are residents of village murchha tehsil puwayan in the district of shahjahanpur uttar pradesh. the state of uttar pradesh vide its office memorandum constituted a committee under the chairmanship of the honourable minister of revenue to suggest its recommendations for transfer of prisons situated in the congested areas of various districts. after conducting its second and final meeting on 10th january2005the said committee recommended to the state government the shifting of the district jails from congested areas to outside the city limits within the district. as per the schedule this shifting was to be done in two phases 1 st phase 1 district jail shahjahanpur 2 district jail azamgarh 3 district jail jaunpur and 4 district jail moradabad 2nd phase 1 district jail badaun 2 district jail varanasi 3 district jail barielly and 4 district jail muzaffarnagar. the existing district jail of shahjahanpur constructed in 1870was one of the oldest and required shifting to new premises the government case is that the district jail is located in a densely populated area of the city and is overcrowded housing as many as 1869 prisoners while having a capacity of only 511. thereafter the state government constituted a committee under the chairmanship of chief secretary government of u p to evaluate and consider the shifting of prisons identified to be shifted in the first phase. prisons in the districts of lucknow moradabad were added to the list. this committee was also to evaluate and recommend the means for modernisation of existing old prisons. in its meeting the committee recommended that a detailed project report dpr be prepared by the rajkiya nirman nigam and that acquisition of lands for shifting of the prisons be done on a priority basis. these recommendations were accepted by the state government vide the approval of the cabinet. following this decision the director general of prisons administration and reformsuttar pradesh requested the district magistrate shahjahanpur to send all the relevant records to the state government for publication of notification u ss 41 and 17 of the land acquisition act1894. the land suggested for such acquisition by the divisional land utility committee was one admeasuring 25 89 hectares 63 93 acres in village morchha tehsil puwayan in the district of shahjahanpur. the state government issued notifications u ss 41 and 17 on 21 08 2008. however the provisions of section 5a inquiry were dispensed with. the state government explained that this was done in view of the pressing urgency in the matter of construction of the jails. being aggrieved by the aforesaid notifications the appellants moved a writ petition before the high court u art 226 of the constitution of india. 