on 18 11 1994 at about 8 00 a m in the morning the complainant jagdish pw 5 along with his two sons namely sukhbir and mange ram pw 6 were busy in cutting pullas reeds from the dola of their field. at that time jage ram a 1 and his sons rajbir singh raju a 2 rakesh a 3 and madan a 4 armed with jaily pharsi and lathis respectively entered the land where the complainant was working with his sons and asked them not to cut the pullas as it was jointly held by both the parties. wordy altercations ensued between the parties and jage ram insisted that he would take away the entire pullas. in the fight the accused persons started inflicting injuries to the complainant and his sons raju gave a pharsi blow on the head of sukhbir jage ram caused injury to jagdish with two jaily blows. additionally madan and rakesh attacked the complainant with lathi blows on shoulder and left elbow respectively and caused several other injuries to the complainant party. jagdish and his injured sons raised alarm hearing which rajesh and usha came to rescue them and on seeing them the accused persons fled away. the injured witnesses were taken to the primary health centre. injured sukhbir was later on referred to general hospital gurgaon as his condition deteriorated. a ct scan disclosed that large extra dural haematoma was found in the frontal region with mass effect and sukhbir needed urgent surgery and he was operated upon and the large extra dural haematoma was removed. statement of jagdish was recorded based on which f i r was registered at police station taoru gurgaon under sections 323 324 325 and 307 read with section 34 ipc. pw 8 ramesh kumar asi had taken up the investigation. he examined the witnesses and after completion of investigation challan was filed under sections 307 325 324 read with section 34 ipc. in the trial court the accused were examined section 313 cr p c about the incriminating evidence and circumstances. first accused jage ram pleaded that on the date of occurrence complainant party jagdish and his sons mange ram and sukhbir forcibly trespassed into the land belonging to the accused and attempted to forcibly cut the pullas. jagdish further claims that he along with rakesh caused injuries to the complainant party in exercise of right of private defence of property. 