one dwarka nath was the owner of considerable moveable and immoveable properties. he made and published his last will and testament whereby he dedicated to this family idol his two immoveable properties. he appointed his two sons rajendra jogendra as executors of his will and provided that his second wife and the two sons should perform the seva of the deity and on their death their heirs and successors would be entitled to perform the seva. dwarka nath died on leaving him surviving his widow and his two sons. in 1899 rajendra made and published his last will and testament whereby he confirmed the dedication made by dwarka nath and appointed his brother jogendra the sole executor thereof. he died on the 31st january1900 and jogendra obtained on the 24th april 1900 probate of his said will. probate of the will of dwarka nath was also obtained by jogendra on the 31st august 1909. bhupendra jnanendra and nagendra then a minor the three sons of rajendra filed a suit on the high court at calcutta against jogendra golap sundari and some others for the construction of the wills of dwarka nath and rajendra for partition and other reliefs. the said suit was compromised and on the 24th november 1910 a consent decree was passed whereby jogendra and golap sundari gave up their rights to the sevayatship and bhupendra jnanendra and nagendra became the sevaits of the idol a portion of the premises no 41 grey street was allotted to the branch of rajendra and the remaining portion was allotted to jogendra. disputes arose between bhupendra jnanendra and nagendra the sons of rajendra and one kedar nath was appointed arbitrator to settle those disputes. the arbitrator made his award whereby he allotted premises no 41 a grey street exclusively to nagendra as his share of the family properties. nagendra thereafter executed several mortgages of the said premises. nagendra executed a deed of settlement of the said premises by which he appointed his wife and his wife 's brother as trustees to carry out the directions therein contained and in pursuance of the deed of settlement he gave up possession of the said premises in favour of the trustees. snehalata dutt filed in the year 1929 a suit against nagendra the trustees under the said deed of settlement and the puisne mortgagees for realisation of the mortgage security. the said premises were ultimately put up for sale in execution of the mortgage decree and were purchased on the 9th december 1936 by hari charan dutt hari pada dutt and durga charan dutt. on the 19th july 1948 the family idol of dwarka nath sree sree iswar sridhar jew by its next friend debabrata ghosh the son of nagendra filed the suit out of which the present appeal arises. 