it was the appellant 's case that he had been in occupation of the said 160 acres of cherikkal land about which and the adjoining lands there was a dispute as to whether the same belonged to a jenmi family known as koodalvalli illom hereinafter called the illom or to the government of the erstwhile travancore state. the appellant 's father and the appellant had occupied these lands made improvement thereon by planting coconut trees arecanut palms peppervines rubber trees jack trees other trees and by constructing bungalow huts wells etc in the bona fide belief that the lands belonged to the illom. it was stated that according to the practice prevailing in the erstwhile state of travancore the cultivators could enter into unoccupied waste lands belonging to the janmies with the object of cultivating and improving them and as they held the lands under them by paying rent the consent of the jemies to such occupation was implied. in respect of the 160 acres of land of the illom which were occupied by the appellant 's father and the appellant there was a dispute between the illom and the travancore state from about 1848. while this dispute was pending it appears the appellant applied to the conservator of forests for registration of the lands in his name but the application was rejected in 1919 stating that the land applied for can not be registered. while the application for registration was pending the dispute between the illom and the state of travancore had reached a stage when the illom had to institute a suit in the district court at quilon for a declaration of its title to those properties. an appeal against it was dismissed. against an appeal was filed in the high court of travancore. the high court issued a commission for inspecting the properties and the commissioner in his report set out the improvements made by the appellant on the lands which comprised of a bungalow in which the appellant was residing a number of small houses a rubbers state and a large number of other valuable trees like jack trees mango trees coconut trees etc it appears that as there was no injunction restraining his dispossession. the appellant pursuant to this order was dispossessed from the lands and possession of these lands was given to the second defendant nair service society ltd in august 1939 thereafter the suit out of which this appeal arises was filed against the government. 