tata consultant engineers was a partnership firm but subsequently the partnership was dissolved and in 1974 the undertaking became one of the divisions of tata sons limited. it functions as a consulting organisation and a service industry and does not manufacture any product or carry on trade its work force consists of engineers and supervisors and different categories of workmen. the tata consultant employees union served a charter of demands in july1974on the appellant and as their demands were not accepted and conciliation proceedings proved fruitless the state government made a reference of the dispute under s 101dindustrial tribunal maharashtra for adjudication. the union filed a statement before the tribunal claiming an upward revision of the wage scales and dearness allowance and an increase from fifteen years to twenty years in the span for earning annual increments. it was urged that the efficiency bar as a feature of the wage scales should be removed. the dearness allowance it was claimed should be granted on a slab system. the claim of the union was resisted by the appellant who maintained that the existing wage scales were fair and reasonable on a region cum industry basis and that it would not be possible for the appellant to bear the additional financial burden if the demands of the union were accepted. the appellant had introduced various pay scales in 1973 and some time later they were revised. there was no separate dearness allowance until january1977 when it was introduced for the first time. house rent allowance was also paid. dearness allowance became payable at 10 of the basic wage subject to a minimum of rs 50 and house rent allowance at 30 of the basic salary. the tribunal observed that compared with the increased paying capacity of the appellant an inference drawn from the prosperity enjoyed by the appellant over the years there was definite need for revising the wage scales. it also laid down the principle enabling the actual fitment of the workmen in their respective wage scales as on that date and also provided for the number of increments to which they would be entitled having regard to the period of completed service. two days after the award was made an application was made by the union stating in the said award your honour has observed at the end of para 22in view of the increase that is being allowed in the basic pay i do not propose to revise the existing scheme of dearness allowance. the workmen have filed an appeal by special leave in which they have challenged the rejection by the tribunal of their claim in respect of dearness allowance which they contend should be pegged to the cost of living index and should not be a fixed amount. 