the appellants claiming to be the tenants of agricultural land hereinafter called as the scheduled land situated in the state of karnataka filed before the land tribunal praying for a declaration that they had acquired occupancy rights in respect of the scheduled land. they alleged that they were cultivating the scheduled land from 1968 till the notified date under the act on wara basis giving 13rd of the share in the foodgrains to respondent no 4. accordingly the appellants prayed for an order of occupancy right in respect of the scheduled land alleging that they and their father were cultivating the scheduled land as occupancy right holders relying inter alia on the entries under the rtc record. the case of respondent no 4 was that the scheduled land was mortgaged to the 3rd respondent rajashankar in 1968 and after the expiry of the said mortgage the mortgagee was liable to deliver possession of the same. the case of tenancy as made out by the appellants or their father was denied. it was alleged by the respondent no 4 that since the respondent no 3 was a film actor and had settled in madras with the consent of the respondent no 3the scheduled land was given to the father of the appellants and the father of the appellants was cultivating the same from 1968 but not as a tenant. accordingly they prayed for rejection of the application filed by the father of the appellants claiming occupancy rights under the act. initially the land tribunal allowed the application of the father of the appellants and feeling aggrieved a writ petition was filed against the said order the high court had set aside the order of the land tribunal and remanded the case back to the tribunal for a fresh decision. feeling aggrieved the respondent no 4 filed an appeal before the appellate authority which was also dismissed. a revision petition thereafter was moved before the high court and the high court by the impugned judgment had set aside the concurrent findings of fact and rejected the application filed by the father since deceased of the appellants holding inter alia that the appellants or their father had failed to prove the tenancy in respect of the scheduled land. a special leave petition was filed against the judgment of the high court setting aside the concurrent orders allowing the application in respect of which leave has already been granted. 