on 19 04 1988 satish narayan sawant the appellant accused no 1 along with two other accused persons and also with two delinquent children allegedly formed an unlawful assembly and that in furtherance of the said common object stabbed one rauji dulba sawant the deceased and also assaulted baby dulba sawant pw 1 ashok dulba sawant pw 2 kunda rauji sawant pw 8 and laxmi dulba sawant pw 18 who are the sister brother wife and mother respectively of the deceased. it is also the case of the prosecution that as a result of the aforesaid stab injuries given to the deceased he expired on the same day. during the survey made at the place of occurrence pw 21 noticed some blood stains in the front courtyard of the house and a pipe of length of about 1 foot or slightly less lying in the courtyard having blood stains. thereafter pw 21 along with p i dsa gave a call to the inmates of the house to open the door and on hearing the call one lady opened the door. on the basis of complaint made by pw 1 an fir was registered and the accused came to be arrested. on completion of the investigation the police submitted the charge sheet against the accused persons namely the present appellant accused no 1 accused nos 2 and 3 and the two juvenile offenders namely sarita and sharmila. the trial court framed charges against all the accused persons for the offence under sections 302 323 143 147 and 149 of the ipc. the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried since there were two juvenile offenders there cases were segregated and the trial against accused nos 1 2 and 3 was conducted during the course of which a number of eye witnesses were examined on behalf of the prosecution. after completion of the arguments the trial court reserved the verdict. the trial court passed an order on 04 08 1998 acquitting all the accused persons from the offences under sections 302 323 143 147 and 149 of ipc. being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order of acquittal the state filed an appeal in the high court against accused nos 1 to 3. 