the appellant accused was working as a head clerk in the traffic cadre section in the office of the senior divisional personnel officer south central railway vijayawada during the period from april1992 to november1997. the nature of duties of the appellant accused included dealing with and processing of the matters like promotions transfers seniority list roster list pay fixation on promotions retirements resignations etc of the personnel. one k rama rao the complainant who was examined as pw 1was posted as yard points man grade a under station superintendent south central railway tanuku from december1995 to june1997. in june1997due to excess staff at tanuku he was instructed to report at head quarters vijayawada and accordingly when he reported there he was asked to go back to tanuku. thereafter he went back to tanuku from where he was subsequently transferred to rajahmundry. thereafter pw 1 made a representation to his senior officer requesting him for posting at vijayawada cheerala vetapalam or tenali later pw 1 was transferred to vijayawada. as the appellant accused was dealing with the transfers the complainant pw 1 met him on 05 11 1997 at his office to pursue about the issuance of the said transfer order. the appellant accused asked him to come on 10 11 1997. when he met him on aforesaid date the appellant asked him to come on the next day as he was busy in pay fixation work. on 11 11 1997again he went to the office of the appellant but he could not find him on his seat. again a day after i e on 13 11 1997when he met the appellant accused he informed him that his request for transfer has been processed and the order is ready and the same has been placed before the a p o for signature and asked him to come on the next day i e on 14 11 1997and demanded rs 200 for releasing the said office order. he reported the matter in writing to the inspector of police central bureau of investigation in short the cbivijayawada. on 14 11 1997a trap was laid by the cbi officials along with panchas and when the accused demanded and accepted a sum of rs 200 as illegal gratification he was caught red handed along with the money which was recovered from the right hand side pocket of his pant. an fir was registered by the inspector cbi visakhapatnam branch. after recording the statements of the witnesses inspector of police cbi visakhapatnam filed charge sheet against the appellant accused for an offence punishable under sections 7131dii read with s 132 of the prevention of corruption act1988 in the court of special judge for cbi cases at visakhapatnam. the special judge cbi convicted the appellant and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of six months and to pay a fine of rs 500 and in default to suffer simple imprisonment for one month for the offence punishable u s 7 of the act and one year rigorous imprisonment with a fine of rs 500 and in default to suffer simple imprisonment for one month for the offence punishable u ss 131d ii read with s 132 of the act. against the said order the appellant accused filed criminal appeal before the high court of andhra pradesh. the high court by impugned judgment dated 03 10 2007 dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant accused and confirmed the conviction passed by the trial court. hence the appellant accused has preferred this appeal by way of special leave petition before this court. 