accused pathan hussain basha was married to pathan haseena begum now deceased in june2002 at guntur. it was an arranged marriage. at the time of marriage it was promised that a dowry of rs 25000 besides other formalities would be paid by the side of the wife to the husband. out of this amount a sum of rs 15000 was paid at that time and it was promised that the balance dowry of rs 10000 would be paid in october2002upon which the marriage was performed. the father of the bride could not pay the balance amount within time because he lacked the resources. the accused pathan hussain basha his father pathan khadar basha and mother pathan nazeer abi forced her to get the balance amount of dowry. it is the case of the prosecution that for non payment of dowry the accused persons harassed the deceased and subjected her to cruelty. this was informed by the deceased to various persons including her relatives and elders. she was unable to bear the cruelty to which she was subjected by the accused persons on 15th february2003the deceased committed suicide by hanging herself in the house of the accused. when pathan basheerunnisa returned from her work the accused sent her out giving her money to bring the soaps upon which she went out and when she came back she found the accused absent and the bride hanging in the house. subsequently basheerunnisa sent her grandson inayatullah to the house of the parents of the deceased to inform them about the incident. when the parents of the deceased came to the house of the accused and found the deceased hanging from the beam with a saree they untied her and took her to the government general hospital guntur hoping that the deceased may be alive. however upon medical examination by the doctor she was declared brought dead. the father of the deceased yasin khan and her mother shamshad begum were present at that time. the fir was registered under section 304b and section 498a of the indian penal code1860. thereafter investigation was conducted. he inspected the site from where he recovered and seized the saree that had been used for hanging. the body was sent for postmortem examination also took photographs of the scene autopsy was conducted over the body of the deceased and prepared post mortem certificate giving the cause of death as asphyxia as a result of hanging investigating officer arrested all the three accused persons. 