this appeal is preferred against the judgment passed by the high court of punjab and haryana in criminal appeal no 181 sb of 2000 whereby the high court partly allowed the appeal filed by the appellants thereby confirming the conviction of the appellants with certain modifications. case of the prosecution is that on the fateful day i e 18 11 1994 at about 8 00 a m in the morning the complainant jagdish pw 5 along with his two sons namely sukhbir and mange ram pw 6 were busy in cutting pullas reeds from the dola of their field. at that time jage ram a 1 and his sons rajbir singh raju a 2 rakesh a 3 and madan a 4 armed with jaily pharsi and lathis respectively entered the land where the complainant was working with his sons and asked them not to cut the pullas as it was jointly held by both the parties. wordy altercations ensued between the parties and jage ram insisted that he would take away the entire pullas. in the fight the accused persons started inflicting injuries to the complainant and his sons rajbir raju a 2 gave a pharsi blow on the head of sukhbir jage ram a 1 caused injury to jagdish pw 5 with two jaily blows. additionally madan and rakesh attacked the complainant with lathi blows on shoulder and left elbow respectively and caused several other injuries to the complainant party. jagdish and his injured sons raised alarm hearing which rajesh and usha came to rescue them and on seeing them the accused persons fled away. the injured witnesses were taken to the primary health centre taoru where dr pardeep kumar medical officer medically examined the injured persons injured sukhbir was vomiting in the hospital and later on he was referred to general hospital gurgaon as his condition deteriorated. a ct scan disclosed that large extra dural haematoma was found in the frontal region with mass effect and sukhbir needed urgent surgery and he was operated upon and the large extra dural haematoma was removed. dr pardeep kumar pw 2 also examined the other injured persons pw 5 jagdish and pw 6 mange ram. statement of jagdish was recorded based on which f i r was registered. he examined the witnesses and after completion of investigation challan was filed under sections 307 325 324 read with section 34 ipc. the accused were examined section 313 cr p c about the incriminating evidence and circumstances. 