Delivering the Courts judgment, Lord Hodge sets out seven principles relevant in the case [10], which counsel for Mr Zoumbas had enumerated.
He notes that Lord Kerrs formulation spoke of dictating the outcome of cases such as ZH, and in that case the Court was dealing with British citizens, unlike the children in this case.
The benefits of British citizenship are an important factor in assessing whether it is reasonable to expect a child with such citizenship to live in another country.
Moreover, Lord Kerr had explained that what he was seeking to say was that no factor should be given greater weight than the interests of a child [12].
Further, the decision maker is required to assess the proportionality of the interference in the particular circumstances in which the decision is made an evaluative exercise that excludes any hard edged or bright line general rule [13].
In this case, the Secretary of State accepted that Mr Zoumbas had established a private life and a family life in the UK.
She then concluded that the interference would be in accordance with the law and in pursuit of the legitimate aim of maintaining effective immigration control [14], having referred to the familys unlawful residence, the fact that family life had been established in the full knowledge that they had no right to reside in the UK and could be removed at any time, and the couples appalling immigration history and the unidentified bank credits [15].
Family life would be preserved as the whole family would be removed with Mr Zoumbas [16].
The first part of Mr Zoumbas challenge rests on a mistaken construction of the decision letter.
It had been accepted that the status of the well being the children as a primary consideration did not mean that it had in every case to be considered first with other possible countervailing issues considered thereafter.
It is important to read the letter as a whole and to analyse the substance of the decision [19].
There is nothing wrong with the Secretary of States use of a template letter in which her conclusion is followed by her reasoning what is important is that the best interests of the children are at the forefront of the decision makers mind [21].
That the conclusions on best interests are set out briefly does not mean they were not considered carefully, and the Secretary of State does not need to record and deal with every piece of evidence in her letter [22 23].
The Court suggests that challenges such as the present would be less likely if her advisers were to express the test in the way it was expressed in ZH (Tanzania), and to expand the explanation of the separate consideration given to the interests of the children [28].
As for the second part of the challenge, it would be possible to conclude, other things being equal, that it would be in the childrens best interests to stay in the UK.
But other things are not equal, including that the children are not British citizens [24].
The Court rejected the criticism that the assessment of best interests was flawed because it assumed that the parents would be removed.
It was legitimate for the decision maker to ask herself first whether it would have been proportionate to remove the parents if they had no children and then, in considering the best interests of the children in the proportionality exercise, ask whether their well being altered that provisional balance [25].
The third part of the challenge cannot succeed, the first two parts having failed [26].
