sections 221 to 232 of ipc are comprised under the first sub head and sections 233 to 240 in the second. sections 221 to 223 deal with the framing and content of charge section 224 deals with the interpretation of the language of the charge and section 225 with the effect of errors in the charge. sections 226 to 231 deal with the power of the court with regard to framing and altering charges and the procedure to be adopted at the trial where a charge is found to be defective or there is no charge or where a new charge is to be framed. section 232 deals with the power of the appellate court or the high court when it discovers that there is material error in the charge. section 233 provides that for every distinct offence of which any person is accused there shall be a separate charge. but it also provides that this will be subject to the exceptions contained in sections 234 235 236 and 239. the first three provisions relate to the framing of charges against a single accused person. section 234 1 deals with the trial of a person for offences of the same kind not exceeding three committed within the space of 12 months from the first to the last of such offences and section 231 2 what is meant by the expression offences of the same kind. this provision lifts partially the ban on the trial of a person for more than one offence at the same trial. section 2351 however goes a step further and permits the trial of a person for more offences than one if they are so connected together as to form the same transaction. thus under this provision if the connection between the various offences is established the limitations placed by section 2341 both as regards the number and the period during which the offences are alleged to have been committed will not apply. sub section 2 of section 235 deals with a case where an offence falls within two definitions and sub s 3 deals with a case in which a number of acts are alleged against an accused person different combinations of which may constitute different offences. section 236 which provides that if a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it is doubtful which of several offences the facts which can be proved will constitute the accused may be charged with having committed all or any of such offences and further provides that any number of such charges may be tried together. it also permits that charges could be framed against an accused person in the alternative if the court thinks fit. section 239 cls a and b cl a says that persons accused of the same offence committed in the course of the same transaction may be charged and tried together. this first thing to be noticed is that section 239 does not read as if its various clauses can be applied only alternatively. cl b says that persons accused of an offence and persons accused of abetment or of an attempt to commit such offence may also be charged and tried together. the opening words of the section show that it is an enabling provision and therefore the court has a discretion to avail itself cumulatively of two or more clauses. the concluding portion of section 239 shows that the provisions contained in the former part of chapter xix shall as far as may be apply to the charges framed with the aid of section 239. does this mean that the provisions of section 233 234 235 and 236 must also be complied with. obviously section 233 does not override the provisions of section 239 section 234 can not also be regarded as an overriding provision because reading it that way will lead to the clear result that whereas several accused persons can be charged at the same trial with any number of different offences committed by them in the course of the same transaction they can not be tried also for offences of the same kind exceeding three in number and committed beyond a space of 12 months from the first to the last. it could not have been the intention of the legislature to create such a situation. again as already stated section 2341 does not override the provisions of section 2351 which permits trial of a person for more offences than one committed during any period provided they are so connected together as to form one transaction. unless the court read section 2341 as not enacting a fetter on section 2351 it may not be possible to give full effect to the latter. it is under these provisions that the account books of the firms must be held to be relevant. what value to attach to them is another matter and would be for the court of fact to consider. 