u s 10 of the aicte act1987it is stated that it is the duty of the council constituted under the act to take all steps as the said council might think fit for ensuring coordinated and integrated development of technical education and maintenance of standards. subcl k of s 101 of aicte act1987 provides that the council might grant approval for starting new technical institutions and for introduction of new courses or programmes in consultation with the agencies concerned. sub cl 1 of aicte act1987 permits the council to advice the central government in certain respects sub cl m. s 11 of aicte act1987 deals with inspection. regulations have been framed by the aicte in exercise of powers conferred on it by s 231 of the aicte act. regulation 2 states that these regulations will be applicable to proposals relating to a grant of approval of the council for establishment of new technical institutions including universities or university departments and deemed universities and for technical institutions functioning on the date of commencement of these regulations at degree and diploma levels b grant of approval of the council for introduction of any course or programme in the technical institutions and technical departments or universities or deemed universities c grant of approval of the council for existing intake capacity of seats and for increase in the annual intake capacity of seats in courses and programmes. regulation 4 deals with the requirement of grant of approval and for the commencement of these regulations. regulation 5 deals with the forms of the applications and regulation 6 deals with the conditions for grant of approval sub cls 1 of regulation 6 deals with the financial position sub cl 2 with the courses or programmes and sub cl 3 deals with the power of admissions and sub cl 4 with tuition fees etc and sub cl 5 with the staff and sub cl 6 with the governing body of the private institutions and subcl 7 with other matters. regulation 8 deals with scrutiny of applications. cl 97 of the kerala university first statute. 