the learned counsel for the accused appellant has placed reliance on shankarlal gyarasilal dixit vs state of maharashtra air 1981 sc 765 1980 indlaw sc 47. therein a charge under sections 376 and 302 ipc was sought to be substantiated on circumstanctial evidence. one of the circumstan tial evidence relied on was that a human blood stain of b group was found on the accused 's pant which blood group was also of the deceased. another circumstantial evidence relied on was that a stain of semen was found on the under pant of the accused. the court held that the presence of blood stain of b group measuring 0 5 cm in diameter on the appellant 's pant and of a dried stain of semen on his under pant were circumstances for too feeble to establish that the appellant raped or murdered the victim b group is not uncommon group of blood and no effort was made to exclude the possibility that the blood of the accused belonged to the same group. as regards the dried stain of semen on the appellant 's under pant the court observed that the accused was a grown up man of 30 years and no compelling inference could arise that the stain was caused during the course of the sexual assault committed by him on the victim girl. in the present case the age of the accused was about 21 years at the time of the incident. on his arrest he was subjected to medical examination and found to be a potent and capable person. presence of semen stain on underwear assuming that the underwear belonged to the accused though there is no evidence adduced in this regard is not by itself an incriminating piece of evidence connecting the accused with the crime in question. so also the discov ery of b group blood stain on the underwear can not be treated as an incrimi nating piece of evidence against the accused connecting him with the crime because there is no evidence that the underwear belonged to the accused and further the possiblity of the underwear being stained with the blood of the person to whom it belonged or the accused if he was wearing it has not been ruled out. 