s 2r states that the expression protected means a person who is deemed to be a protected tenant under the provisions of the said act. chapter iv of the andhra pradesh act deals with protected tenants and s 34 of the said act provides who is to be considered as a protected tenant and uses the expression that a person shall subject to the provisions of sub ss 2 and 3be deemed to be a protected tenant in respect of the land if he has fulfilled the conditions mentioned in clauses a and b of sub s 1 of s 34 of the said act. sub s 2 of s 34 of the said act also deals with to be deemed to be a protected tenant in respect of any landfor certain purposes. s 35 of the said act deals with decision on claims and stipulates by sub s 1 of s 35 of the said act that if any question arises whether any person and if so what person is deemed under s 34 to be a protected tenant in respect of any land the landholder or any person claiming to be so deemed may within one year from the commencement of the act apply in the prescribed form to the tahsildar for the decision of the question and the tahsildar shall after enquiring into the claim or claims in the manner prescribed declare what person is entitled to be deemed to be protected tenant or as the case may be that no person is so entitled. sub s 2 of s 35 stipulates that a declaration by the tahsildar that the person is deemed to be a protected tenant or in the event of an appeal from the tahsildar 's decision such declaration by the collector on first appeal or by the board of revenue on second appeal shall be conclusive that such person is a protected tenant and his rights as such shall be recorded in the record of right of where there is no record of rights in such village record as may be prescribed. s 36 of the said act deals with the recovery of possession by protected tenant. s 37 deals with persons not entitled under s 34 to be deemed in certain circumstances as protected tenants. s 38 of the said act deals with right of protected tenant to purchase land. s 39 deals with right of protected tenants to exchange lands. s 40 of the said act makes rights of protected tenant heritable. sub s 2 of s 40 of the said act indicates who are the heirs who would be entitled to hold the tenancy on the death of the protected tenant and on what terms. sub s 3 of s 40 of the said act provides that if a protected tenant dies without leaving any heirs all his rights shall be so extinguished. the explanation to sub s 3 of s 40 of the said act provides who should be deemed to be the heirs of a protected tenant. subs 4 of s 40 stipulates that the interest of a protected tenant in the land held by him as a protected tenant shall form sixty per cent. section 99 bar of jurisdiction 1 save as provided in this act no civil court shall have jurisdiction to settle decide or deal with any question which is by or under this act required to be settled decided or dealt with by the tahsildar tribunal or collector or by the board of revenue or government 2 no order of the tahsildar tribunal or collector or of the board of revenue or government made under this act shall be questioned in any civil or criminal court. s 102 of the said act stipulates that the act shall not apply to certain lands and areas and provides inter alia as follows 102 nothing in this act shall apply to lands leased granted alienated or acquired in favour of or by the central government or the state government a local authority or a cooperative society. s 3 of the said act gave power to requisition immovable property. s 4 of the said act empowers taking possession of requisitioned property. s 5 deals with rights over requisitioned property. s 6 deals with the power of release from the requisitioning. s 7 authorises the central government where it is of the opinion that it is necessary to do so to acquire requisitioned property. s 8 deals with principles and method of determining compensation either for requisitioning or acquisition of the property and inter alia provides for appointment of an arbitrator in certain contingencies in case there was no agreement for determining compensation. s 9 deals with the payment of compensation and provides that the amount of compensation payable under an award shall subject to any rules made under that act be paid by a competent authority to the person or persons entitled thereto in such manner and within such time as may be specified in the award. 