s 52 of the gujarat town planning and urban development act1976 provides for the contents of preliminary and final scheme. it inter alia provides for giving of a notice by the town planning officer as follows 1 in a preliminary scheme the town planning officer shall i after giving notice in the prescribed manner and in the prescribed form to the persons affected by the scheme define and demarcate the areas allotted to or reserved for any public purpose or for a purpose of the appropriate authority and the final plots ii after giving notice as aforesaid determine in a case in which a final plot is to be allotted to persons in ownership in common the shares of such persons. section 65 of the gujarat town planning and urban development act1976 power of government to sanction or refuse to sanction the scheme and effect of sanction. section 67 of the gujarat town planning and urban development act1976 effect of preliminary scheme on the day on which the preliminary scheme comes into force a all lands required by the appropriate authority shall unless it is otherwise determined in such scheme vest absolutely in the appropriate authority free from all encumbrances b all rights in the original plots which have been re constituted into final plots shall determine and the final plots shall become subject to the rights settled by the town planning officer. section 68 of the gujarat town planning and urban development act1976 power of appropriate authority to evict summarily on and after the date on which a preliminary scheme comes into force any person continuing to occupy any land which he is not entitled to occupy under the preliminary scheme shall in accordance with the prescribed procedure be summarily evicted by the appropriate authority. rule 21 of the bombay rules provides for the procedure to be followed by the town planning officer. it makes it obligatory on the part of the officer to give notice of the date on which he will commence his duties and shall state therein the time within which the owner of any property or rights which is injuriously affected by the making of the town planning scheme shall be advertised in one or more newspapers published in the regional language and circulating within the jurisdiction of the local authority and shall be posted in prominent places at or near the area comprised in the scheme and at the office of the town planning officer sub rule 3 of rule 21 of the bombay rules provides for serving of a special notice of at least three clear days upon the person interested in any plot or in any particular area comprised in the scheme before the town planning officer proceeds to deal in detail with the portion of the scheme relating thereto. sub rule 4 makes it imperative upon the town planning officer to give all persons affected by any particular of the scheme sufficient opportunity of stating their views and shall not give any decision till he has duly considered their representations if any. sub rule 5 provides for recording a brief minute setting out the points at issue and the necessary particulars if during the proceedings it appears to the town planning officer that there are conflicting claims or any difference of opinion with regard to any part of the scheme. rules 26 of the rules do not contemplate service of individual notice. it prescribes service of notice in form h a copy of the notice in the said form is kept at the office of the town planning officer during office hours. any person affected by the proposal of the town planning scheme is entitled to inspect the scheme in the office where arrangements for explaining the scheme proposals are made. it furthermore provides that any person entitled to claim damages in terms of s 82 of the gujarat town planning and urban development act1976 should communicate the details of his claim to the town planning officer. s 81 of the gujarat town planning and urban development act1976 enables the state to transfer of right from original to final plot or extinction of such right. 